1930-0101, Poem by Shri Mataji at the age of 7
View online.
1 January 1930
Quote
(India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Poem by Shri Mataji at the age of 7
I want to be smaller, Like a dust particle.
Which moves with the wind
It goes everywhere, can go, Sit on the head of a king
Or can go
And fall at the feet of someone.
And it can go
And sit everywhere.
But I want to be a particle of dust That is fragrant, That is nourishing
That is enlightening.
Nirmala Salve

1961-0101, Extract from souvenir, Dignity of Art
View online.
1 January 1961
Quote
Pune (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Extract from souvenir, from the site Sahaj A-Z. India, 1961.
Artists have to raise the public eye to their standards of taste; and not to stoop down to the cheap demands of the public, thus
surrendering their freedom.
This can be done by contacting of educational and social institutions, by the enlightened artists.
Through articles in magazines and newspapers, the ideas of such artists can be propagated.
Through dramas, films and radio talks, people can be educated for the understanding of real art. Thus the dignity of art can be
maintained.
By coming into contact with the public at large through these societies, the social-self of an artist will develop into a keener and
more sensitive being. It will react to the slightest unrest in the nation; to the slightest imbalance in the society.
If he sees a leper on the street, his heart will go out with such sympathy that, through his art, he can create an atmosphere by
which social workers, doctors, scientists, and the people in charge of the state will be forced to think of some solution to the
problems of leprosy.
If an artist finds his countrymen being unpatriotic or cowardly, he can, through others, create a deep respect in their minds. Such
is the motivating power of an artist.
They are the loveliest flowers of the creation, the sweetest dreams of the Creator, and the dearest parts of the human society.
Perhaps they do not know how they are loved, worshipped and followed by their spectators..."

1970-0101, Quote Sahaja Smile, from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 14 (March-April 1983), Page 15
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Shri Mataji: "You must remind me to return your money else I will have to repay it in the next life".
Kay: "That’s fine by me, Mother".

1970-0101, Advice to Western Women from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 20 (March-April 1984), Pages 33--38
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Advice to Western Women from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 20 (March-April 1984), Pages 33--38
Now, this is in the West. Now, the women are intelligent and the women of the west being intelligent and educated have
developed a kind of a very complex situation around themselves. These things have made them a kind of a man without
manliness, and that is why their whole behaviour becomes extremely odd. Sometimes I just don't understand, but now I've
started understanding, that the way the women are, they want to dominate men. But they don't understand that by dominating
you cannot create good relationship.
Now, to dominate a man one way could be just to go on behaving like a man, you see, pushing him around and all that, saying,
"Don't do this. I don't like it. This is not good. That is not good". But that is not so sophisticated. So, the other way is to all the
time talk about the miseries of your past. "I am like this. This is wrong with me". All the time she's sick. All the time she's
miserable. All the time she's insecure. All the time she's so dependent, she needs her husband. She wants the attention of the
husband. The husband must look after her. Ultimately, I think the husbands must be getting absolutely fed up and running away
from the wives. And that must be why the prostitution is so strong here, because at least the prostitute tries to please the
husband and not to make him miserable, because she has to earn her living.
And I think it is just the other way round in India. There the men will fuss. The men will say, "This is not good". They will say, "We
are sick and you must look after us", and all that. They don't say that we have to look after you. They say that you have to look
after us. And the women think that, because they are their wives, they are their shaktis and they have to bear it upon themselves
and give them the joy.
Now, the women here have another very bad capacity, in Sahaja Yoga I have seen it, that they always say that the negativity
attacks, all the time, for any rhyme and reason. Like just now somebody told me that when you have a child you feel more
attacked by negativity because you are on your own. Imagine ! When you have a child you have such a great company of your
child. I mean, for an Indian mother, as soon as she is pregnant she feels the happiness. When the child is born, she feels the
company of the child. For her nothing more is needed than that her own child is there, and then, through her child, she learns how
to love other children.
But here even when the children are born they put the same nonsense on them. "Oh, how bad is my husband, he has done so
much to me, and how bad is this world, and how bad was my mother...'' And this is how they try to dominate the children, making
that child absolutely miserable. That is how we get to these "Les Miserables". From where it has come ?—the sources are here.
Now, if they are uneducated they are even worse, because they have a complex. If they are less intelligent there is another
problem. They try to play all dirty tricks with the husband and with other people. If their husband has any relationship with
anyone they don't like it. It is most surprising, isn't it ? Like friendship; or if the husband wants to talk to some other men,—not
women of course, women you can have some objection,—but I can't understand, that they don't like friends of the husband, to
come in the house. It is the other way round in India. The husband's friends are very much welcomed and looked after by the
wife, and there is a sweet relationship between them, and they call her the sister-in-law. It is very sweet.
But here it is just the other way round. They just abhor all the relations of the husband, and this is something most surprising
because the husband is not single. All his relations are part and parcel of him. He is obliged to them, related to them, or he is

attached to them, and if she really loves the husband, then she should accept the other relationships also.
Then, all their lives they have lived like this, by making, I would say, a show that they are miserable, and they continue with it after
they are married. And in Sahaja Yoga also, I have seen the way they behave.
Towards any calamity an Indian woman will stand up. She is the one who will stand up, at the time of calamity. Otherwise she
will not show. She is not on the scene. Nobody will know there is a woman working, she is not the one who will talk first.
For example, if my husband and I are sitting and there is an interviewer, he will say that this woman is deaf and dumb, she
doesn't talk. Really, many people who have seen us together say, "We never knew about you. Your husband never said a word
about you." You see, like that, it is very common, woman just keeps outside. People didn't know that I could be Mataji because
those who had known me otherwise had never seen me talking, because you are not supposed to talk when your husband is