1930-0101, Poem by Shri Mataji at the age of 7
View online.
1 January 1930
Quote
(India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Poem by Shri Mataji at the age of 7
I want to be smaller, Like a dust particle.
Which moves with the wind
It goes everywhere, can go, Sit on the head of a king
Or can go
And fall at the feet of someone.
And it can go
And sit everywhere.
But I want to be a particle of dust That is fragrant, That is nourishing
That is enlightening.
Nirmala Salve

1961-0101, Extract from souvenir, Dignity of Art
View online.
1 January 1961
Quote
Pune (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Extract from souvenir, from the site Sahaj A-Z. India, 1961.
Artists have to raise the public eye to their standards of taste; and not to stoop down to the cheap demands of the public, thus
surrendering their freedom.
This can be done by contacting of educational and social institutions, by the enlightened artists.
Through articles in magazines and newspapers, the ideas of such artists can be propagated.
Through dramas, films and radio talks, people can be educated for the understanding of real art. Thus the dignity of art can be
maintained.
By coming into contact with the public at large through these societies, the social-self of an artist will develop into a keener and
more sensitive being. It will react to the slightest unrest in the nation; to the slightest imbalance in the society.
If he sees a leper on the street, his heart will go out with such sympathy that, through his art, he can create an atmosphere by
which social workers, doctors, scientists, and the people in charge of the state will be forced to think of some solution to the
problems of leprosy.
If an artist finds his countrymen being unpatriotic or cowardly, he can, through others, create a deep respect in their minds. Such
is the motivating power of an artist.
They are the loveliest flowers of the creation, the sweetest dreams of the Creator, and the dearest parts of the human society.
Perhaps they do not know how they are loved, worshipped and followed by their spectators..."

1970-0101, Quote Sahaja Smile, from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 14 (March-April 1983), Page 15
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Shri Mataji: "You must remind me to return your money else I will have to repay it in the next life".
Kay: "That’s fine by me, Mother".

1970-0101, Advice to Western Women from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 20 (March-April 1984), Pages 33--38
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Advice to Western Women from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 20 (March-April 1984), Pages 33--38
Now, this is in the West. Now, the women are intelligent and the women of the west being intelligent and educated have
developed a kind of a very complex situation around themselves. These things have made them a kind of a man without
manliness, and that is why their whole behaviour becomes extremely odd. Sometimes I just don't understand, but now I've
started understanding, that the way the women are, they want to dominate men. But they don't understand that by dominating
you cannot create good relationship.
Now, to dominate a man one way could be just to go on behaving like a man, you see, pushing him around and all that, saying,
"Don't do this. I don't like it. This is not good. That is not good". But that is not so sophisticated. So, the other way is to all the
time talk about the miseries of your past. "I am like this. This is wrong with me". All the time she's sick. All the time she's
miserable. All the time she's insecure. All the time she's so dependent, she needs her husband. She wants the attention of the
husband. The husband must look after her. Ultimately, I think the husbands must be getting absolutely fed up and running away
from the wives. And that must be why the prostitution is so strong here, because at least the prostitute tries to please the
husband and not to make him miserable, because she has to earn her living.
And I think it is just the other way round in India. There the men will fuss. The men will say, "This is not good". They will say, "We
are sick and you must look after us", and all that. They don't say that we have to look after you. They say that you have to look
after us. And the women think that, because they are their wives, they are their shaktis and they have to bear it upon themselves
and give them the joy.
Now, the women here have another very bad capacity, in Sahaja Yoga I have seen it, that they always say that the negativity
attacks, all the time, for any rhyme and reason. Like just now somebody told me that when you have a child you feel more
attacked by negativity because you are on your own. Imagine ! When you have a child you have such a great company of your
child. I mean, for an Indian mother, as soon as she is pregnant she feels the happiness. When the child is born, she feels the
company of the child. For her nothing more is needed than that her own child is there, and then, through her child, she learns how
to love other children.
But here even when the children are born they put the same nonsense on them. "Oh, how bad is my husband, he has done so
much to me, and how bad is this world, and how bad was my mother...'' And this is how they try to dominate the children, making
that child absolutely miserable. That is how we get to these "Les Miserables". From where it has come ?—the sources are here.
Now, if they are uneducated they are even worse, because they have a complex. If they are less intelligent there is another
problem. They try to play all dirty tricks with the husband and with other people. If their husband has any relationship with
anyone they don't like it. It is most surprising, isn't it ? Like friendship; or if the husband wants to talk to some other men,—not
women of course, women you can have some objection,—but I can't understand, that they don't like friends of the husband, to
come in the house. It is the other way round in India. The husband's friends are very much welcomed and looked after by the
wife, and there is a sweet relationship between them, and they call her the sister-in-law. It is very sweet.
But here it is just the other way round. They just abhor all the relations of the husband, and this is something most surprising
because the husband is not single. All his relations are part and parcel of him. He is obliged to them, related to them, or he is

attached to them, and if she really loves the husband, then she should accept the other relationships also.
Then, all their lives they have lived like this, by making, I would say, a show that they are miserable, and they continue with it after
they are married. And in Sahaja Yoga also, I have seen the way they behave.
Towards any calamity an Indian woman will stand up. She is the one who will stand up, at the time of calamity. Otherwise she
will not show. She is not on the scene. Nobody will know there is a woman working, she is not the one who will talk first.
For example, if my husband and I are sitting and there is an interviewer, he will say that this woman is deaf and dumb, she
doesn't talk. Really, many people who have seen us together say, "We never knew about you. Your husband never said a word
about you." You see, like that, it is very common, woman just keeps outside. People didn't know that I could be Mataji because
those who had known me otherwise had never seen me talking, because you are not supposed to talk when your husband is
talking, you just keep quiet.
Here it is the other way round. If there is an interviewer, the woman will talk first. The man will be sitting like a big mouse, looking
round and opening his mouth a little bit to say something.
The aggression of these women is very subtle. They come up with such sinister questions, anything they say has a sting and
then you get fed up of such a person and that is why there are divorces.
The men of the west are much better than Indian men. They are not dominating. They understand the value of women. They have
given so much freedom to them. They have given them so much prestige and honour. But if you give something to women, they
should be capable of bearing it up, isn't it? What is the use of giving everything equal to them when they have no capacity to bear
it? That is why it is such an imbalance, I find, for women the way they are so sinister about the whole of life.
Life is beautiful, full of joy, happiness, bliss. Morning until evening if you go on making somebody miserable then you are against
life. You are against God. This they must realise. The whole thing is that they have got equality without evolving themselves up to
that point.
It is rather like the Arabs. They got the Cadillacs. First they were on the camels or on the donkeys, then they became rich Arabs
and they had Cadillacs. Now, by sitting in the Cadillac you don't become a cultured man.
You see, in the same way if the women are suddenly made to feel, oh, they are equal, this, that; they have not developed that
panache, as you say in your language. They haven't developed that sophistication. So the inferiority works out and they go on
pinching the men all the time. Every word, and the tongue also doesn't have that sweetness.
But in our Sahaja Yoga we have seen some very great Sahaja Yoginis, who are really senior women, I would suggest. Like you
can say......, a solid woman, very solid woman, very solid woman, and she understands things very well. Like......she is a good
wife, no doubt, she makes her husband happy........... is another one. See, these people have that sweetness about their
husbands and I have never seen them telling me about their miseries or thinking about their past or anything. Never. Never.
Always they said we were happily married. ...... told me, "we were happily married". Her husband was a Russian, and they had a
problem because of the war, but she never said that my husband made me miserable, or this thing, that thing. Never. I never
heard them saying like that. And even if that is the case, or something is there, you should be happy. Even if, say, your husband is
a bad man, he is not a Sahaja Yogi, you should be happy.
In Sahaja Yoga it is compulsory that you should be happy, you should be joyous and you have to be joyful. There is no place for
people who are miserable. If they try to go on with this they w ill have to get out of Sahaja Yoga. Take it from me. All of them w ill
be thrown out. If you do not want to come up you will be out for good.

So, it is a challenge for all the Sahaja Yoginis in the West that you must be joyous. You must be happy people.
Now, you see that in any case like this they build up their ego very subtly. If you just say that, "No, that is not good", immediately
they start crying, you know they are upset. Men don't know what to do, because these women have picked up their own images
and they want to do whatever they think, and if men see something more than they do, and say, "Do this, this would be better",
they are finished.
They get identified with these things. So, you can't say that they are left-sided, but they are egotistical. And in this ego there is a
sinister attitude by which they make the men and woman and children miserable.
So, this must be stopped now. Anymore of this misery is to be stopped in the West. Nothing. What is this misery you have got ?
You should go and see the women of India who are smiling and laughing. They have children to look after. They have ten, eleven,
twelve children to look after. They have no money. Early in the morning, at four o'clock, they have to get up and take their bath
because of conditions in India. They cannot laze out like you do. And then they go to the well, fill the water and bring it home. You
see—beautiful, see their faces shining. They come home, put the food down there, slowly wake up their husbands, put things for
his bath, look after their children, clean the house. By the time the children are up they see the clean house, you should see how
much they work hard. And you will not know that they are working. Absolutely silent. You have seen how these women used to
cook. Did you ever hear any body outside ? As soon as people are coming they are serene. They are looking after them. They are
intelligent, I mean,...... is an income tax officer, do you know that ? ......is an income tax officer. They are officers, but how do they
behave ? Have you ever seen them anywhere in anyway asserting themselves? Never.
In India education is very strong. Most of the girls in India are at least graduates, actually, at least. But there is no ego about it.
They understand their position as wife and as a woman, and they know that they are the ones who are the source of joy, and they
have to give that joy to others. Here the women don't understand how much they can give joy. After all your Mother is a woman
and if She can give so much joy why shouldn't you be able to?
And this is what it is. I just don't understand, such a great potential, such a great source just cut. Just cut. That is why, you see,
the motherhood is lacking, nothing else but the motherhood. The women are all right nothing wrong with them, it is the
motherhood.
Even a little child in India—see our Anupama is hardly now six years old. She came to speak in my ear, "Who is this baby here
sitting smiling ?*' I said his name is Machendra Nath. "Ah I this is Machendra Nath."! She is a six year old girl, she doesn't know
how to carry, you remember, she took the baby. Then she wanted to give him something to eat. If you have any child bring it
home. These two girls will look after it, give food to it, they will look after it. They are just all the time, you know, nursing the
children. Even to the grandfather, "Now,can I feed you ?" Grandmother of course, but to the grandfather! "Can I feed you ? Would
you like to have this ?'* I take my bath, I come out and she is there with the powder to sprinkle on my feet and to wipe them with
the towel. All the time they are running up and down. You can't imagine how motherly they are, to me. To me, they are motherly.
To their grandfather they are motherly.
Early in the morning—this Shumi was about two and a half years old, very small—so early in the morning she used to see the
grandfather sitting there. She used to go into the room, take his newspaper—just hardly used to walk, you see—and his
spectacles and bring them to him. What does it take ?
But if the attention is all the time to extract others, it comes from some sort of very sinister idea. It is very repulsive. It is not that I
have seen it once, but when I talk to them, I really feel very disgusted sometimes. And I feel, oh God, these women when they
marry what will happen ? And when they marry, I see. And that is why the men here don't know what to do. You see, if you have
any problem, a woman has to bear it.
Indian women have great courage. Like when the war started in India, a woman, who was a widow and a queen, she rode on

horse herself, she tied her sari, she took her child at the back—she was a queen—and jumped from the fortress about a hundred
feet down and she fought the British. She died, of course. The British killed her. But the Britisher himself—the general—wrote
that, "We won the battle, but the victory and the glory was that of Lakshmi Bai."
Not only that but there are many women like that. Wondrous. But they would only show up if there is a calamity. When things
reach the cusp of just drama, that time they come up. Otherwise they are quiet.
You see, that kind of thing should be the womanhood. I mean, if I have to tell you about Indian women, I will have to give you a
big lecture. Really. And you have seen how they behave, how dignified and how sweet and ...I must take my hat off to them. They
are mature in the womanhood in the best possible way, the potential of women.
See they worked so hard. If you remember a little girl who was married and she invited us for breakfast, about three years back, a
little one, very small. We had gone to a canal and she said, "Tomorrow, Mother, you come and have breakfast at my place"., and I
said, "No, it is too much. We are so many people, about thirty five people. How will you feed us ?," And apart from that the other
leaders were also there. "Oh, I will manage", she said, and when we went there she gave us such a nice breakfast. And all the
neighboring women—you see, they got up at 4 o'clock, did everything—and all of them in really great joy, that Mother is coming to
our house and they were so enamored about it.
That is called as "fondness" in India. There are no words for joy here. There are no words for different joys, but it is this fondness
of people, and they were feeling obliged that we were eating. And I ate and ate. I said, "No, I am too full, I can't eat any more," and
they said, ''Mother, you didn't like anything, or what ?"—and giving and giving. So sweet. And so many, I think I told them thirty
five, there were fifty. Arranged like that also, and in a small little house, they arranged in front of the thing. Very silent, very silent.
Very efficient, because of the efficiency, you see, of love, that they could manage it.
It is so, sweet, and little, little things they do. It is so much energy that goes in. So nice. And this time I am going to write even to
the Poona ladies, that they should arrange our food, not in the Rajwade Karyalaya and you will see how they will arrange it. They
will get all the best vegetables of the market, the best chickens of the market, and the best of everything and do the best that
they can, put all their heart into it. "The saints are coming to our house, the saints are coming to our house".
The beauty is this, and despite this, many people think that Indian women are very much suppressed because of their goodness.
They don't mind. They say our goodness cannot be suppressed. Goodness is a thing that is more important than suppression
and oppression and all that. They don't take to all these nonsensical ideas. Not at all.
It is so nice. And then the husbands feet attached. You see, my daughter, now she receives her husband's phone calls practically
every day from Saudi Arabia. Look at my husband. Now, he is an old man of sixty-five years. If you leave it to him he will
telephone to me ten times. I tell him don't telephone all the time, but he will go on telephoning. You see, that is the source, so you
want to talk and you want to have something.
But here it is the other way round, they want to extract from you. What is there for men to give ? It is women who have to give.
Women have to give. They don't realize their potential and they go on eating somebody's head all the time. How can they love
him? They cannot.
And that is what I think of when I tell Indian men to marry western women. They shudder a bit, because why should they make
themselves miserable ? Just think, if they know about western women as they are. So, this must change. We are Sahaja Yogis.
We have nothing to do with western ideas of women and all that. I don't know, whatever book I have read about western women,
about the heroines and all that, they were never like this. This is something else I am seeing actually from what I have read.
(Question: Could western women imitate Indian women?)
Also they should, but there is no need to imitate, because you are Sahaja Yogis. You get it spontaneously. Just accept that. Now

accept that. Whatever is the past is past. You can do it.
Our job is to make everybody happy and joyous. That is it. That is our job. That is the source we have got. We are the source of
joy. Accept this situation. We are the source of joy, of confidence, of love, and affection, and kindness and gentleness. Then,
once in a while, if the husband does wrong you have a right to tell him. He w ill never mind it. But all the time if you go on coaxing
him he will say, "Oh, this permanent, mundane, every day." This needed saying. Even Australian women should be told. This is
very common. But they are very sweet, ah? Don't trouble the girls, if they don't trouble you, then you shouldn't trouble them.

1970-0101, Unidentified Talk after Evening Program, eve of Shri Ganesha Puja
View online.
1 January 1970
Evening Program
Pune (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Unidentified Talk Eve of Ganesha Puja Maharashtra India.
Gopal saying please take me across this ocean of illusion, this [pandurangara] is requesting Shri Krishna – Panduranga is Shri
Krishna in Maharashtra is called as [unclear] Also there's a big story about it but I'll tell you later on. So he says he is requesting
please take me across and this is what I wanted.. But the way he sang it with such devotion, sincerity and honesty. It's really just
stirred up all the vibrations I know and you are feeling all that. You see we Maharashtrans are very lucky people, that we had such
saints who were realised souls. They knew about chaitanya. They knew about vibrations. They knew about the higher life and all
the time whatever they have sung is the hope that everybody will get realisation, or they have described that state of realisation.
I mean I must say the Maharashtrans are the luckiest people. I don't know if they understand it or not but they are the most
blessed people because there are so many saints who were realised souls. They are Nathas who were realised souls and all of
them have sung the song and the place of this higher state of life. And this one you can see now. This song also says same thing
that let me go beyond this. But I must say one thing, congratulating all these Sahaja Yogis from the west that they never had
heard about these things, never. They never knew about these things. They never knew there's another world so beautiful as that.
But the way they have accepted it, they way they have got into it and the way they are enjoying this Divine music is very
remarkable. They have never studied any Indian music at all.. They have never heard any Indian music before, but the way they
enjoy, it is because of chaitanya ok – because Indian music has been coming from OM and that's why because you are Spirits
you can enjoy it. [Hindi].
You see only an atma can appreciate this song of atma. And that's why without understanding the language; without
understanding the meaning; without understanding the music and intricacies of that, just enjoying it. That's what we to do is to
enjoy. After all why to have the – why to have anything just to enjoy and this what we have to thank [unclear - Ajib?] for this thing.
A great thing that he has done. He himself has got his realisation and sings with that wonders and when he sings you see we get
immediate vibrations. He is the only singer I have seen so far and who has been that good, and who has been able to keep you
united with the chaitanya.
So we have to thank him very much for this beautiful music which has touched all your heart and now in this song also he is
saying, “Oh God please make your heart large and give me realisation. So God always has a very large heart. Only thing you have
to ask for realisation you see it cannot be forced. So now the culmination of our spiritual life has come. All the saints have a
meaning. All the Shastras are meaning. Every incarnation has a meaning today.
Tomorrow we are going to do worship of Shri Ganesha.You know how important he is and he has come here and he will also
attend tomorrow's puja and everybody will help us there, and I'm sure you will all enjoy it.
May God bless you.

1970-0101, The Essence of Sahaja Yoga, from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 19, Jan.-Feb. 1984, Pages 28--32
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
The Essence of Sahaja Yoga, from Nirmala Yoga
In today's talk I will dwell on the essence of Sahaja Yoga. I am sure that it has been explained to you before. Besides, most of you
are from Sahaja Yoga itself. So I need not go into details.
First of all we need to understand that we are passing through an extremely serious time pregnant with unpredictable
consequences. When we look at life we do not seem to understand that if we miss this opportunity which has come our way, for
our evolution, we will not only be depriving ourselves of it or this country, England, but also it will be a stupendous loss for the
whole of creation. The trouble, however, is that in the name of God, of evolution and of higher life, a plethora of of spurious
people have come out making it well-nigh difficult to convince anyone of the existence of truth.
Under the circumstances one has to talk about truth. But mere talking about truth rarely leads to the experience of truth. It is
altogether a different realm, a new awareness which you will have to get to understand the truth for which I do not know how
many of you are really prepared or how many of you would like to know. Or even if you would like to, yet how many of you will
really achieve it. But the problem is the other way round. It is not a problem that we have only a few people, nor that I cannot give
realisation. It is also not a problem that you cannot know the truth. The irony is that whatever is false, spurious or silly finds quick
acceptance among the masses.
Sometimes I feel that I have developed a unique method by which I can give realisation en masse all over the world. But it really
poses a problem for me if the masses are not interested. In fact, it is only very few who take a keen interest in their evolutionary
process and would like to come out of their ignorance in which they have been living. In all the ego-oriented countries it is very
difficult to bring home the truth that we are still ignorant. We have to know a lot. It is very difficult because they think they know
everything, because they have been to the moon. The Russians, for instance, still say that they saw no God when they orbited in
space, which is like saying that one has been to the third floor but hasn't seen the top.
Where does God reside ? Where does He manifest within us ? In what manner does He manifest ? We do not know what to see.
What we want to see is possible only through our effort. 'If we have not been able to see God, then He does not exist.' This is how
we develop our attitude in this matter. But better say 'no' to all that we did not know through our effort. Because we have not
known about Him. So He does not exist. You turn round in a cave. So when you see a shadow of yourself you believe in that only
and say, 'nothing else existed.' The light does not exist. That kind of attitude I have persistently been facing. And sometimes I do
not know how to give them realisation.
Now you have to start the other way round. You have to seek. You have to ask for it. Nobody is going to fall at your feet and say
"Well, you get your realisation. You have this, for heaven's sake, please have it". Because nothing is selling here. You are used to
salesmanship, that is, if anything is selling you have to be persuaded or requested. You can save pounds for a sale and all that.
But nothing is for sale here. This is a very difficult thing for people to understand. In this present day atmosphere, where we do
not know if we can get anything which is not for sale. However, I hope, slowly and steadily all of us have to get our realisation.
Somehow, we have to work very hard. Sometimes it is very frustrating and sometimes so stupid—the way people react. Like the
other day when we had a meeting at Brighton I was laughing all the while. It is so sad. A gentleman who came to our programme
made complaints. Look, who has got time to put him on a video; who is interested in taking his photograph. He says he is a

managing director. So what ? In the presence of the Divine what is a managing director or what is even a King ? Just think of it.
Who is he ? What does he think of himself ? He has complained against us. Even the laws are so stupid sometimes that one can
hardly understand. Has he got any right to complain if he comes to a programme which is being conducted with a video on me or
if you are photographed ? How can you complain?
On one side I find such stupid people and on the other a host of genuine seekers. How to reach them ? They are like a diamond
covered with mud. So much mud. To find out the diamond in the mud, one has to dive into a mine of ignorance, to get that
diamond which is lost. It concerns me so much that I feel this mud is going to cover their brains and their eyes whatever else
they have, so that they may not receive their realisation. They may miss it. Actually the Divine does not know what human beings
have created. Really, I tell you, the Divine is in the dark as to all the nonsenses that you have created around you. All kinds of
nonsenses you have created out of your ignorance, out of your ego and out of the choice that you had. I can't explain why people
have created this kind of ignorance which cannot be broken or removed. Because you are so much identified with it. It is like a
stuck up stamp which refuses to come off. And when such a thing happens you feel 'O, God' ! The whole creation has been
created, the whole working has taken place and the human beings have grown so well having reached this stage. But now in this
modern life which they are leading you find them so stupid and foolish that they have begun deluding others with their stupidity
and foolishness. How are we to approach those people who are true seekers ? Those who have been seekers for ages ? All their
lives before have been lost. Sometimes it is very disappointing. But still hoping against hopes, I hope we reach all the corners of
the universe where we find all people who are true seekers. It is their power to know the Divine; know the Divine. It is not for
those who are managing directors or kings or something ! What does it matter in the presence of God. They would be pushed
out. They will not be allowed to enter the kingdom of God. That kingdom is only For those who have known. Not for those who
simply talk about God. Those who say that we are worshippers of God and we have learnt so much it will be said, "that is well,
then go back to the place where from you have come". Whatever you have known is through your awareness, and in your
awareness you have come to know. The awareness has to be enlightened. It is not what you know but human awareness which
has still to grow. It involves such a lot of journey even after our realisation.
It takes no time sometimes to give realisation to so many people. I know it has happened with so many. But they do not know
what they have to achieve. The ego is such a horrible stuff that people do not want to see what they haven't got with them, what
they have to have and what they deserve. They do not want to see that beauty, that light, that is the Spirit. The reflection of God's
love is the most precious thing that you could think of. I do not know how many times I have delivered lectures in England, apart
from the hard work I have put in. Of course there are results, but progress has been slow. Compared to the fake and artificial
people who have made so much money out of you, Sahaja Yoga is working slowly.
I would not have been disappointed if it was at the time of Christ because then there were very few seekers. Actually even the
close disciples that Christ collected were not true seekers. You are seekers of truth. So many of you have taken to this path just
to pursue the truth. But where are we going ? What are we doing about it all ? What are our ideas about the truth ? Is it that our
ideas are but a by-product of our ego ? Is it that we do not want to seek the truth? I have met all kinds of people in this country
including those who occupy important positions at various levels—public and private life—lords, ladies and a host of others. They
ask "Who wants to change" ? I say "Really ?" That is true, because they think they are the greatest. Born thus, they hope to carry
their lordship and possessions with them to heaven ? When they say "who wants to change" what can be said except that they
have reached the dead-end, the full-stop from which no further journey is possible.
Now, this, I must say, can work out only with people who are, seekers who want to know through their awareness what is the
truth. You have to know your Spirit, for, without knowing your Spirit you cannot know the truth and whatever I may talk to you is a
waste of time—a complete waste of time. Because you haven't got the awareness, today, to know the truth I am talking about.
So, I must earnestly ask you to become the Spirit. Why should you hesitate to do what you are told to, so that you will get your
realisation, which means that you have to become the Spirit first. Until and unless this awareness is enlightened you cannot see.
It is like describing the nature of colours to a blind man. You have to open your eyes.
But even this simple thing people find difficult to accept. The reason is that they have become very naive. They don't know what
it is, and also they do not have any inclination to understand. Now you see a tree standing there and you must know, that they are

rooted. Somebody has told you there are roots but you do not believe it because they are not visible. It is as simple as that. But
why don't you try to find out if the trees have roots or not. Supposing somebody says "whatever are outside, that much more are
inside." So why not try you to see into it? This is the simple question we should ask ourselves "why should I put any barrier to
seeing", if that is going to give the best in the world, if it is going to give an inkling of that beautiful thing called the Spirit. Why
should we not have it ? You don't have to pay for it, not even to exert for it. You don't have to do anything.
But you must desire. This is the Point I am trying to make. If you do not desire it from your own heart, God is not going to fall at
your feet, imploring "please desire me". And if you understand that you have to really desire it because it is such a desirous thing
that I must tell you that this Kundalini is the pure desire within you. It is not yet manifested, not yet awakened, in the sense that it
has not yet acted. Imagine how important it is. You should have the desire to be one with the Divine, to be one with your Spirit.
The desire has to be strong, if not, then you would be challenging the Kundalini, that is, you turn anti-Kundalini. Then the
Kundalini would not rise. But what has this brain achieved so far ? Just look at it. You must understand. What have we achieved
by this brain ? For example, ask this stupid managing director "what good has he done for anybody. What does he know about
the spiritual life ? What does he understand about Christ's life?" But if he sends a letter, any newspaper is willing to publish it.
Look at the stupidity of the whole thing. They do not understand that anything that has to go to the masses must be sensible;
from a sensible man who is said to be an authority on spiritual life. What good has this fellow done to anybody. But if I write
something or any Sahaja Yogi says that by coming to Sahaja Yoga he has given up his bad habits or has got cured his cancer or
diseases, then nobody wants to listen to you. Nor does it make any news. On the other hand they think you are mad. But a man
like him, if he writes, they publish it. So it shows clearly we are not only contending with people who are not only mad but also
absolutely foolish. Who have no sense at all as to how they have to live and how they have to conduct themselves.
Sometimes you have to take it upon yourself for going into and discovering the truth. It is you who have to find it out. For
example, I say that this is a place where there are lots of diamonds or this is a cave in which there is a lot of gold. The gold is not
going to come to you. You have to go to the cave and get it. It is as simple. I am not saying you walk towards anything or do
anything like that. You have to desire and desire from your heart It is impossible for me to raise your Kundalini if you do not
desire it, because Kundalini itself is the pure desire. What can I do about it ? Can I force it ? You cannot push it out. If you want to
have a seed sprouted, you have to plant it in the mother earth, you cannot take it out in bits and pieces. You have to have a pure
desire. And if that desire is not there, then I am breaking my head against the wall. So it is important to understand that you must
have that desire which is the highest. But if you are satisfied with things which are useless and nonsensical, then what am I to do
about it ? There is no psychology which can do that, because you have to have the desire to be alright. But this is something
innate and does not work with people who do not have pure desire. This has been written down since long; it cannot be
changed-, it cannot be forced, explained, discussed or argued about. Nothing can be done; it has to work out from within. Even if
you have worked it out on someone, you may not achieve the results.
So, when the situation is difficult and the children are also so adamant what can Mother do ? Push them in ! / am very much
concerned because this ego which sometimes is selfish and conceited, satisfies itself and is very happy. It w ill not allow you to
get to the point where you really stand, where you have all your powers and where you are the master of being. The identification
with the ego is so much that it is easy to take a bull by the horns but to take an ego-oriented man to the practices of Sahaja Yoga
is very difficult.
Today I am rather disgusted but other moods also come—the moods of compassion and tremendous love. I should do
something to bring sense to these people. Something should happen to them otherwise what I see is a complete disaster. It is
going to happen. I do not want to frighten you like Mrs Thatcher does about the Russians. That might be imaginary. But this is
real. I am warning you that the disaster is going to come as destruction itself. But the greatest thing is the failure of the desire
that it could not communicate with you who are chosen specially in order to bring the Kingdom of Heaven. But suddenly you will
find that they all have fallen into a sieve without a way out. The Sahaja Yogis too feel frustrated at times. Whatever it is, as far as
I am concerned they have tremendous desire. But I am so desireless that the desire may not always work out. You see, I am a a
desireless person. So I ask the Sahaja Yogis to desire, so that people will have the great desire to become the Spirit. This is the

greatest thing that we can give to our brothers and sisters, to the people, to the children, to this beautiful world we live in, to the
beautiful light and to the beautiful time they all have to enjoy. / hope those who come for the first time w ill understand my
difficulty and try to see that you should desire only your Self-realisation and nothing else. Just desire that, and forget about
everything else even if you are managing director or a king. Keep all your shoes outside and just desire your Spirit.
You see the difference between me and Christ. He got so fed up that he cried out "let me be crucified". Of course it was in the
plan that he should die on the cross. / have to see that you all get your realisation somehow. It is like a Mother's desire to give a
bath to the baby and get him cleansed. So whichever you like—whether to be desolate or like to receive a rebuke—/ am willing to
work it out But at least ensure that you desire to get your realisation.
May God bless you.

1970-0101, Quote from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 12 (Nov.-Dec. 1982), Page 25
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Quote from Nirmala Yoga
All should clean their inner beings. You should think “why have we come to Sahaja Yoga ? What benefits have we got and what
can we get? Where do we go wrong ? What should we do further ? Where are our pitfalls ? What have we left and taken for our
growth?” I find, even after coming to Sahaja Yoga, in most of our wakeful time, we think of external things. We must see how
much loving and devoted to God, we are.

1970-0101, Quote, from Advice given to Sahaja Mothers from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 16 (July-August 1983),
Pages 29--31
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
It is a very special responsibility, that of having children

1970-0101, Quote 2, from Advice given to Sahaja Mothers from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 16 (July-August
1983), Pages 29--31
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Whatever's going on in the mind will affect the child—the mind has to be happy— you cannot be with artificiality or fantasy.

1970-0101, Unidentified Hindi Talk, date unknown (extract on Swadishthana)
View online.
1 January 1970
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Swadishthan Chakra.
The quality of this Chakra is that you become creative. Your creativity increases. People who never even wrote a line, start
writing poetry. People who had never given a speech started giving long speeches and people who had never painted, never been
artistic, become artistic. Become very creative. We have our architects, who have scaled great heights. So creativity comes into
human, and he believes that his creativeness is very important. He does not care about money, he cares about being creative
and neither do many people want to get a big name, for which create some or the other weird thing.
Then he doesn’t have any worry or preference for the money, that look at the money, and not care about how the creativity is. Nor
do people then think that they should get famous, and for that they wouldn’t end up making something morbid. You know some
of the strange things that get made these days. Why? That this will help us become famous; that people will remember us for
this. But in that, there is no art.
So, the portion of art that exists in there, you realise that when this second chakra of yours, the Swadhishthan, becomes alright.
And because of this Swadhisthan, when we think, we use the power of the grey cells in our brain. And this feeds that power; this
chakra.
You know, people who overthink, they get all sorts of diseases. We call them right sided illnesses. One of those is that the liver
may get spoilt, or else you may get diabetes in the Pancreas. If not that, he might get kidney trouble, or if not then constipation.
Or if even not that, then it might be asthma.. or then, there may also be a heart attack. Or in the extreme, he might also get
Paralysis. So the right sided diseases, they come from the SwadhishtanChakra. Now, the left sided illnesses – they also come
from this same chakra.
Now how the Kundalini takes care of the Swadishthan Chakra and gives it….. that when you awaken the Kundalini of somebody
and his Swadishthan Chakra is caught then in the back, where the Swadishthan Chakra is there, you will think there is heart over
there. When there is fast throbbing, you know that this man’s Swadishthan Chakra is caught. When is right Swadishthan is
cleared, then his attention become pure and all the stress etc. which is within him nowadays is finished and he becomes settled
in peace.
Nowadays it is very important that we keep our Swadishthan Chakra in good condition as we are burdened with innumerable
workloads nowadays. By keeping the Swadishthan Chakra clear, however much the human is troubled or he has any problems ,
he sees them in a peaceful and detached way and he understands what has gone wrong. Means that his Swadishthan Chakra
gets so much spoilt nowadays and so many illnesses are caused. Everything is there, but there is some specialty of the
Swadishthan Chakra that it is so bad in this Modern age.
Then there are also those other diseases, I don’t want to go into their details but will say this that other than diseases, human
being become very dissatisfied and becomes very angry. Becomes right sided. In little little thing he is short-tempered, he feels
that I am a man of my such a position but no one respects me. A nobody also believes that he is important person. This happens
due to the right side Swadishthan and when the left side Swadishthan gets caught then the Person becomes very worried and
sad. He becomes depressed and he thinks that there is nobody worse than me. Everybody is troubling me. I have problems. All
kinds of psychological cases happen.

So these two sides of the Chakra, the left and right, should be taken great care of and this is very useful thing in Sahaja Yoga
because both these chakras become cleared. When they are clear then you understand everything as if you are watching
yourself from the outside. Oh….so now you are getting angry…., take a seat, you laugh at yourself. Make fun of yourself. You think
about yourself …..Yes what I do….what I am doing…. so in this way human put his attention in that place and your attention
becomes enlightened and it corrects the attention. Sahaja Yoga is very important for the Swadishthan Chakra and nowadays all
the problems are due to the Swadishthan, this I ……..

1970-0101, Unidentified Hindi Talk, date unknown (Extract on Agnya Chakra)
View online.
1 January 1970
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - VERIFIED
Translation from Hindi
[...] you have come to the programme and whilst sitting here, you are still thinking about your problems and worries. Oh, this
happened to me, that happened to me. When should I discuss this with Mataji — what calamity has fallen upon me? Mataji, you
are the Goddess, these are my troubles. Instead of trying to understand what is being said, you continue to overthink about your
problems and are allured into illusions. These illusions cause you cancer, or else you get this disease or that. This type of mental
projections – what are we thinking? What type of thoughts do we get? Thoughts such as- we have this grief, we have that grief,
this mammoth problem. Instead, you should rather “count your blessings”. How many blessings the Almighty has bestowed
upon us?
Crores of people live in this city of Delhi. How many of them have got Sahaja Yoga? We are some special people; not some
frivolous people who should spoil their attention. We have been blessed with Sahaja Yoga. We should have a realization of this
from within and should go deeper into that inner being. That is how you can get rid of these deceitful limitations. If you will not
break free from these limitations yourself, somehow you will start having such experiences that will themselves break these
shackles- when you think, this is ours. If you will say we are from Delhi, one day these people from Delhi will outcast you. If you
will say we are from Noida, then people from Noida will run after you with their guns. Then you will realize why did I say I am from
Noida. Then, when you will run towards Delhi, the people from Delhi will scorn you saying why are you coming here now, you are
from Noida. This way, you will belong nowhere and will have nowhere to call your own.
The reason for this is that your attention (Chitta) also belongs nowhere – neither this way nor that. Unless you realize and go
deeper into this, you might call yourself a Sahaja Yogini or a Sahaja Yogi, I don’t think you would have become one in the real
sense. Because the first attribute of a Sahaja Yogi is that he has tranquil attention (Chitta) and is extremely powerful – not
scared of anyone – is strong. And his life is very pure, his body is pure, his heart is pure and with the light of his Spirit (Atma) he
spreads love in the whole world. I think somebody who cannot love, cannot be a Sahaja Yogi at all. He hasn’t climbed even the
first rung of the ladder.
Like you see, so many kites flying in the sky but the strings of all these kites are in someone’s hands (control). If any of the kite’s
string breaks, or if the grip is lost, one can never know where the kite will fly off. That hand is the Spirit (Atma). So, keeping your
attention towards your Spirit and making yourself pure in this process is the penance (tap swaroop) in Sahaja Yoga. For this, you
did a hawan today, this is also a penance (tapa) because fire engulfs and destroys all the things. Similarly, by your penance all
your bad thoughts, all the wrong and all your limitations within, are destroyed. Receiving this bliss is your right and you can
achieve this joy and you have achieved it too. But, to spread this joy, you must have the depth.
If you go to Ganga Ji (River Ganges) with a small bowl, you can fill water in it and come back. And, if you take a pitcher along, you
can fill the pitcher and be back. However, if you can make such arrangements that the water from the Ganges can be redirected
towards you, you can have all of the river water flowing around you. So, you should watch your state. Are you taking water in a
bowl from Sahaja Yoga? Are you limited to the joy of self? Or for everyone’s joy? Or, are you the source of this bliss. So, this
Agnya Chakra is penance (tapa), this is a penance. To attain depth, it is important to have austerity (tapaswita).
We spread far and wide. Sahaja Yoga spreads rapidly. Sometimes, you will see in programmes I wonder whether all people can
be accommodated in the hall? How will it be managed? It will spread rapidly. But how many attain the depth? So, for attaining

this depth, austerity (tapaswita) is required.
By penance, I don’t mean you should sit and fast. It is not required. But, if your attention is on food, then you must abstain from it.
To watch your attention (Chitta) at all times, is the penance (tapaswita) in Sahaja Yoga. Because you may spoil your Agnya due
to your attention (Chitta). Where is my attention? What am I thinking? What am I doing at this moment? What am I thinking? If
you watch your attention, always watch your conscience (antarman), then your attention will be illuminated in the Agnya. This is
the penance (tapasya) to control your attention, observe and watch your attention and thoughts.
Watch now, where is your attention? I am talking and where is your attention. The moment you start talking about attention,
where did it go? The attention (Chitta) is so distracted. I am talking and where is your attention. So, you should watch your
attention. Controlling attention doesn’t mean doing it forcefully. But when you watch your attention in the light of your Spirit
(atma), then your attention becomes illuminated. You should be focused on watching your attention (Chitta). When you see
anything, for example, this pillar in front of me is adorned with beautiful flowers. Now in each vision you can observe something.
I can remember everything, where, which, wherever and how much is the difference. The whole image is formed. The attention’s
(Chitta’s) concentration (ekāgrata) is what forms these images. That is what improves your memory. You can know everything in
totality. You come to know of everything through your attention.
But, if your attention is distracted, then you cannot grasp the depth or intensity of anything. If your attention is moving outside all
the time, you cannot remember anything. So, you see, I see this everywhere, like at the airport – talking to someone here but
looking elsewhere, looking here, then looking there. But you won’t remember anything – who is it, what is it? So, pure attention
(Chitta) is very focussed (ekāgra). And such attention will absorb only what is worthy of being absorbed. Something that isn’t
worthy, pure attention will not absorb it. It won’t look towards such things. It will be averted from such things on its own.
Because it is so pure, it can’t be corrupted by impure things. It won’t go there. Now this is up to you that you watch within and see
where your attention is going. This is the penance (tapa). In Sahaja Yoga this is the only penance (tapa) – watch where the
attention is going. Where am I going? Where is my heart going? If you can do this penance, you will be able to cross the Agnya.
And there are no doubts about Sahastrāra because I am already sitting there.

1970-0101, Letter to Dr. Raul, from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 8 (Mar.-Apr. 1982), Page 23
View online.
1 January 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
My dear Dr. Raul,
I received a very detailed letter from Damle. It was a very wise step on your part to have met Shri Gagan Gadh Maharaj. What he
says about the miracle of Sahaja Yoga is absolutely true. The reason why this great sanctuary never manifested in reality was
that whenever Adi Shakti descended as incarnation (She) did not have all the chakras integrated through Sahasrara. The
complete harmony and unison merged into an integrated instrument of her personality is bringing forth these fantastic results.
So much so that I am surprised at myself.
I think he (Gagan Gadh Maharaj) also cannot imagine the dynamics of this Discovery and hence he feels that 'Avadhutas' have to
be away in the forests and that Cancer can give you reaction. You have cured the Cancer of Phadke's father. Did it give you any
reaction? When you are at a giving end how can you receive anything? You are reborn as Lotus which does not take anything bad
from muddy surroundings but transforms its surroundings with its beauty and fills it with fragrance. This is the magic of a
Realised soul.
Do you think doctors will accept that there exists the Kingdom of God and that it creates us and that the Lord of our autonomous
nervous system is our Spirit which is the reflection of God? You can quote the names of people like Mr. Bose and Mr. Daftary and
Mr. Sharma who is miraculously cured of his colour blindness through Sahaja Yoga.
In any case I am going to America next year. One of my dear Sons Dr. Lanjewar has now become the president of the Medical
Practitioners Association of New York and is very anxious to have a conference next year in New York. Due to our slavery for so
many years, doctors in India have lost the capacity to know that we are the people born on the Yoga Bhumi. Their thinking is so
slavish that they think all our ideas about medicine are stupid while western knowledge is very sensible.
I bless you with all my heart that Dr. Ramlingam has good vibrations. Shri Rama in him would have wisdom to understand the
ways of God Almighty. I send you my love and protection so that you can break that barriers of ignorance of our medical men.
Let them know that the time has come, for them to accept that science is not every-thing. It only discovers whatever exists and
appears before the gross being. Once we become subtle rising in the fourth dimension, we see the subtle being, the Spirit and
contentment and Divine working of this love. It cannot be done by argument. One has to be realised. One has to evolve through
Sahaja Yoga spontaneously as this is a living process.
For Cancer, best treatment is of water, i.e., putting feet in the river, sea or in the water at home with the photograph. Water has
the religion (Dharma) of cleansing and hence Shri Vishnu and Dattatreya, who are responsible for the religion (Dharma) of
human beings, are to be worshipped. They help you to cure and also the local Deity of the Chakra that is attacked. Put the patient
before the photograph with the candle and his feet being in the water, bring down your hands across the sympathetic nervous
system towards the water. The patient will cool down gradually. If he gets realization, then he is cured. More in the next.
Your loving Mother Nirmala

1970-0101, Ego and Superego, from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 5 (Sep.-Oct. 1981), Page 4
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Man is still in a transitional stage. Little more he has to jump and he becomes that, for which he has been created. Human brain
and heart are the most evolved things. Human heart also has to be correlated with the brain. From our stomachs fat rises into
our brains passing through all the centers, evolving to be cells of the brain. The fat, to become brain, has to evolve, i.e., to achieve
certain amount of charges of human awareness. Human brain has a dimension, which animals do not have, a mental or
emotional dimension, with which we understand love. We understand how to receive and reciprocate. We understand beauty and
poetry; and we also understand how to create these. Brain is triangular and prismatic in nature. When the rays of God’s divine
power flow in, they get refracted into different angles and by the principle of of parallelogram of forces, a part of the power
escapes to left side and a part to right side. Therefore Man can think of past and future but animals cannot. In the transitional
period it is necessary to protect the brain carefully and make it independent of God’s will and make it used by itself so that it
develops another dimension of wisdom. For this purpose the system of ego and superego has been created which is the by
product or reaction, of human activities. Every activity has a reaction. If you say no to something, the reaction is ego If you
accept something the reaction is super ego. Ego and superego, completely cover fontanel bone and separate you from all
pervading power giving you freedom, to act as you like, to use your brain as you like to learn; because if the evolution has to go
any further you have to try. So, whatever God has done is for your good. He has not given you ego and superego to get spoiled
and finished. You must have ego and do not have to fight with it. Your ego should become one with that of God. Once you are
awakened once your light has come, then you can do it.

1970-0101, Unique Discovery - TV (date unknown)
View online.
1 January 1970
Unique Discovery – Tv (date Unknown, Location Unknown)
Public Program
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
Shri Mataji: The truth is that we are not this body, this intellect, emotions, this ego, the conditionings, but we are the spirit. And
the second truth is that there is a subtle , All-pervading Divine Power which is doing all the living work.
Announcer: In 1970 Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi founded Sahaja Yoga, a dynamic technique for meditation that takes us beyond our
limitations. Through the awakening of the spiritual energy within us, we can experience the integration of all aspects of our life,
physical, mental, emotional and spiritual. Thousands of people from more than 40 countries have experienced this
enlightenment. True peace in the world will only be achieved through the inner transformation of human beings. Sahaja yoga, [is]
the unique discovery.
Shri Mataji: I bow to all the seekers of truth. Truth is something, which can not be changed. It can not be challenged. It can not be
imagined. One has to feel the truth on your central nervous system. What is the truth? The truth is that you are not this body, you
are not this mind, you are not this intelligence, you are not these conditionings or your ego, but you are pure spirit. This is one
truth. The second one is that this whole universe is covered with a very subtle energy, which is called as the All-pervading Power
of God’s love. Or in Sanskrit language it is called as Paramchaitanya. These are the two things which we have to seek, and this is
what once we know what it is, then the truth you can feel it on your central nervous system. For this happening, there is an
element arrangement within us already made within our being, is a power which is a residual power of Kundalini. It is called as
Kundalini because it is coiled in three and half coils. It is resting in the triangular bone called as sacrum. That shows that the
Greeks knew that it was a sacred bone. Now, this is the energy that has to be awakened, and when it is awakened, it rises
through 6 very subtle energy centres and pierces through the fontanelle bone area. And then you feel as if a cool breeze is
coming out of your fontanel bone area. But this is just like a connection with the mains, as we have for every instrument. With
this happening, you become a self-realized person in the sense that you develop a new dimension in your awareness in your
central nervous system. On which you can feel the centres of these chakras of your own being and that or others. So you get the
self-knowledge , also you get the knowledge about others, what are their problems. Thus, you become collectively conscious, as
Jung has said that [the] next stage of human awareness is going to be collectively conscious. So you become collectively
conscious, it is a question of becoming it is not just a certificate, it is not exercise. Sahaja, ‘saha’ means with, and ‘ja’ is born with
you. Also, sahaj means spontaneous. Yoga means the union with this All-pervading Divine Power. . Sahaja Yoga is the right of
every human being to achieve that ascent. In the evolutionary process, we have come to the stage where we are human beings.
But the knowledge that we have is not absolute, to get to the absolute knowledge, we have to rise higher into [a] new realm
beyond thought. And this [is] a new realm which you achieve after Sahaja yoga, by which you feel the truth, the absolute truth,
and everybody feels the same. With the awakening of the Kundalini, so many things also happen, because it nourishes all your
centres. By the nourishment of the centres, you find that your health suddenly improves. Definitely Sahaja yoga has cured many
psychosomatic diseases like cancer, no doubt about it. But it only happens if the Kundalini rises and pierces through your
fontanel bone area. Then it only happens, and it works out in a way that will definitely show you that something new has
happened. But apart from that you get your mental peace. Many mental cases have been cured. Also, you get your intelligence
suddenly sharpened up because the brain that you are using is just a bit part but, with the light of the spirit comes into your brain,
you start seeing things much more deeply and understanding them much better. It is such a remarkable thing, that it has to
happen to all of us as the last jump or breakthrough into the evolutionary process. As this Sahaja Yoga is not a new thing, it has
been there, but it was only transmitted from one master to one disciple. Only in the twelve century, somebody wrote about it very
clearly for the masses, and now it is becoming practical and thousands of people are getting realization all over the world. May
God bless you all.

1970-0101, Shri Mataji's House
View online.
1 January 1970
Brompton Square House, London (England)
See also: https://vimeo.com/showcase/1549546/video/126072648

1970-0101, Letter in Marathi II from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 14 (March-April 1983), Page 11
View online.
1 January 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
Letter in Marathi II
I have received letters from all of you but have not been able to write because now in London Sahaja Yoga work has started with
great drive.
Delhi Sahaja Yogis write very few letters but most of them are happy. Sahaja yogis of Bombay are alright, Sahaja Yogis of Rahuri
are enjoying. Sahaja Yogis of Bombay have great responsibility and therefore had to face many attacks. The first attack came
when I was in U.S.A. At that time many Sahaja Yogis were affected and many fell away. Later on when an attack was on all
London Sahaja Yogis collectively followed wrong path which was full of dangers and harms. Many wicked people from that part
are, still hiding themselves in some Sahaja Yogis in the form of ‘badhas’. You have to vigorously use Sahaja Yoga methods
against them. These wickeds attack you from Agnya and Heart. From Agnya they send Anti-Sahaja Yoga ideas in your mind and
from Heart they make complaints. If you identify them they will become ineffective. There is one remedy for it which can be
applied only after the realization. Because if your car does not start, your brakes and accelerators are of no use. But if you do not
use the accelerator even after it starts, how will your car move?
You can attain any destination that you fix. All your auto suggestions will materialise. The remedy that is to be used is : your
attention should be on Me and you should make the following conditioning of thoughts on your Agnya “ How fortunate we are to
have been realized ! We are Sahaja Yogis. God has chosen us. How can we work if we remain weak ? Adi Shakti has given us the
Power to redeem the whole mankind. We can do it and we will do it". On heart you should criticise with these thoughts “ How
deep is God's love for us ! He has given us the realization. He is the ocean of mercy. Ignoring all our mistakes, He is working hard
day and night for our welfare and, instead of praying for His forgiveness of our mistakes, we are making complaints against Him
and blaming Him" ! The following thoughts will please your Hearts, “O God, please give us the power of Your love. May I be the
drop in the ocean of Your love that is enveloping the whole universe, so that its loving pulsation is vibrated through my life and I
remain engrossed in that bliss”.
May your life be flooded by the waves of Divine love. Always loving you, much more than myself.
Your Mother,
—NIRMALA

1970-0101, Handwritten Notes on Leadership compiled by a Sahaja Yogi
View online.
1 January 1970
(Location Unknown)
Handwritten notes on Leadership. (Advice to leaders)
To sense how the natural process work through the Principle of Kundalini. For this knowledge the leaders must meditate and
follow their vibration's dictation about themselves. First before meditation give 7 time bandhan. Have an open mind. First locate
the conditioning and your preferences & prejudices.
Prejudiced leaders when they are not deep see in others what fits their prejudice.
To know how things happen do not use your mental projections or deliberations. They have their linear movement that recoils
into their polarity. Do not try to make things work. They say "we wish make amasses work". You just work the principle and the
process will manifest.
There is no mental analysis needed as there is no cause or effect. The Spirit which is enlightened by kundalini works out
everything because it has a built in capacity as the seed. The mother earth is the Param ? Power.
Allow the Divine to work it out, through your Spirit. You work less mentally, you be only the instrument. To be is the becoming.
This works through surrender "Oh Mother come in heart, Please come in my head, Please come in my attention". The kundalini
will do the job for you.
One cannot surrender the leadership which is difficult. True simplicity is not easy for a complicated mind. The leader teaches by
example and not by lectures which bloats the ego and creates Shabda Jalam (a rain of words?) for the leaders.
Do not seek or worry about money or praise, there is plenty of both in Sahaja Yoga. I have seen people lose it in no time when
they start thinking mentally and conclude "nothing is wrong with me ", because they are leaders, "I am absolutely correct." They
are ejected out of Sahaja Yoga by centrifugal force of truth and in thirty nations, the bells that were singing their praise, suddenly
become denouncing the ending, murmurings do loud open condemnation.
Constant intervention with the group blocks the progress of the group. If one individual is constantly troublesome put attention
on him through your Mother either he will leave or improve. Do not worry who leave Sahaja Yoga. There is no place for half
hearted yogis in the kingdom of God.
Remember that all mental projections have polarity and in Sahaja Yoga it acts very fast. Anything very pure white shows the
smallest black dot clearly. Leaders should never talk about their own problem, life or dismiss to the group. Any such obsession is
dangerous for one's growth and that of the group. The good leader should never show off his holiness or his so called closer
relation to Mother. It is improper to have your favorites even your wife is to be treated like other Sahaja Yogis.
She should not be consulted, on the contrary, if she advices you against some one or for some one please tell her that you know
everything. To be yourself fully grounded in the Parama chaitanya and being aware of the group, you can permeate innate
religion Vishwa Nirmala Dharma. There is no need to create grades in the group because it will create competition and jealousy.
Leave it to Mother's discretion. The leader's own state of consciousness makes him more open receptive and secured. Thus he
gets the respect, style is no substitute for substance.
The good leader is not spectacular but his group is. The fame that he seeks carries him away from the work. The leader should
not outshine the teaching. A leader should not have favourites, Please get your emotional conflicts clean. Lead with nourishment
Lead without destroying or hurting
Do not take credit for helping. Lead without possessiveness. Watch the silence in the group and feel the content and the concern
of the group. Feel the essential mood of the group. How the wind is blowing in the group.

1970-0101, Letter to London Sahaja Yogis from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 4 (May-June 1981), Front Back
Cover
View online.
1 January 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Letter to London Sahaja Yogis
My dearest Children, Thank you very much for the beautiful flowers you sent me. They remind me of you all. I missed you very
much all those days of separation.
I hope you get my tapes from Australia, I have said lots of new wonderful things.
I am coming back very soon to enjoy your joyful and sweet company.
Yours as ever,
Your loving mother Nirmala

1970-0101, Letter, Meaning of Puja
View online.
1 January 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
Old Letter in Marathi – Meaning of Puja.
My dear Nirmala
Many Blessings
Received your loving letter. I have also very much enjoyed Navaratri Puja.
But Puja is also an external offering. Even your heart has said so. But you should understand how you get the reward or
blessings of the Puja and its prasad. A Puja or a prayer grows from your heart. Mantras are the words of your Kundalini. But if
Puja is not performed from heart or if Kundalini is not associated with recitation of Mantras then that Puja becomes a ritual.
If you become thoughtless in Puja, know that your heart is also involved in it. Collect the Puja material and offer it sincerely.
There should be no formality or bindings in the offerings. It is correct to wash hands, but is your heart washed?
When attention is on heart it does not go to others. Although you remain quiet from outside, you are speaking from within. Hence
you should not, be silent for long time.
If man's heart is not clean, then the silence becomes very harmful. At the same time loose talks can bring catastrophes.
You should say the Mantras in Puja but with great faith (Shraddha). There is no alternative to Shraddha. You should perform the
Puja when Shraddha grows deep, so that heart itself gets all Puja performed. At that time waves of bliss start flowing because it
is the Spirit that is saying, how can any thought come at that time?
People pour their wine in the glass. Your Puja is like that. In that, wine is your faith and the glass is the recitation of Mantras and
the worshipping.
When you are drinking that wine forgetting everything, how can a thought come! Then only bathing in the ocean of bliss! How can
that joy be expressed in thoughts?
Who will pour that wine, back in the glass, which is to be drunk and that too in the inferior glass of thoughts?
However, the joy that you get after drinking the wine is eternal and ever-present. It becomes your asset.
Many such Pujas have been performed in my presence. Every time a big wave comes and take you to a new land. Experiences of
many such lands become your own. They give vastness to personality and open new gates of joy. Best is worshipping in the
heart. If, the photo by looking at it, can be placed in heart or, after the Puja, its view goes to heart, then the joy which you get only
at that time, can become everlasting and ever-present.
Show this letter, to all Sahaja Yogis and send its copies.

Your Mother Nirmala

1970-0101, Quote 1 from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 13 (Jan.-Feb. 1983), Pages 23 and 25
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Quote 1 from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 13
Magnanimity of mind is very pleasing and it attracts others. This magnanimity lies within human being and is awakened by
Kundalini. But how can those people have this joy of spontaneity who are living in artificial atmosphere ? Although Kundalini has
been awakened and She has pierced Brahmarandhra yet heart must be pierced. But some Sahaja Yogis have hearts like stones,
absolutely devoid of love; they use sarcastic words while talking to others and want to show that they are great. On many
occasions I have seen, people push others or shout at others even in my presence. Particularly, when you shout at the children, I
feel pain in my heart. At least Sahaja Yogis should have deep love for each other. When you know that you are the children of the
same Mother, why do you look down upon some people ? Are you perfect ? Are there no faults in you ? We only talk of universal
love. If you have no love for each other amongst you, then in which mankind will it be seen ? All I want to tell you is to clean your
minds of venomous thoughts that you have for other Sahaja Yogis.If a Sahaja Yogi visits your town, invite him, look after him, as
if he is your brother. His happiness will purify your homes. I cannot understand how there can be groups among the Sahaja
Yogis, because every moment your condition is improving or going down.Know that making such groups is disastrous. Look at
the good qualities of others and enjoy their love. Don’t worry about their bad qualities. Leave them for me. You will realise in
meditation that this is the only way of opening the fountains of bliss.

1970-0101, Quote 2 from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 13 (Jan.-Feb. 1983), Page 25
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Sahaja Yogi parents have great responsibility towards their realised children. They have to be protected, disciplined and brought
up in proper atmosphere of love. Realised children cannot tolerate negativity. They fight with it.

1970-0101, Quote 3 from Nirmala Yoga, Issue 13 (Jan.-Feb. 1983), Page 25
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
I do everything in collective consciousness. If I cure one person, many such cases become alright automatically.

1970-0101, Unidentified Talk related to Guru Puja
View online.
1 January 1970
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
So now, there are two very nice tapes we have got, the first one is called as 'Bandagi' and which are lyrics composed by my
brother, we call him Babamama, but his name is Hemendra Kumar.
I have given him a name called 'Belos', meaning 'the pure', he has composed all these poems here and Mr. Prabhakar Dhakre,
who we call as Guruji has, is the one who has done all the musical part of it and the musicians are here Suresh Wardkar, Uttara
Kelkar, Chaya, Sarita Bhave and Sanjay Talwar. I think you have heard it but this was not with so many of these so now we have
got them and for which the money is to be collected there.
Philip, you are doing the whole selling?
Wolfgang is selling it.
So, you can get it from him and later on also we will carry them with us if some remains later on for other Sahaja Yogis. So, I
declare it as inaugurated, for the inauguration of this thing I declare it as 'being inaugurated'.
You must know my brother is a chartered accountant and I cannot understand, he suddenly became such a great poet because I
never knew he had this talent and he never composed any poems but just after realization all these beautiful things have come
out and specially in Urdu language which he did not know, Urdu language he did not know much, I know little bit but not much
myself but suddenly the whole thing has started pouring out of him and he has now become such a master poet. I don’t know
this is the miracle of Sahaja Yoga.
Now this is another one from Sanjay Talwar, he is the one, he calls it as 'Roohani Roshni' meaning the 'light of Spirit' or we can
say 'Spiritual light' and is composed by him, the thing is, he has also suddenly become, he also became suddenly a poet.
He is a chemical engineer and suddenly you find a chemical engineer becoming a poet through Sahaja Yoga and his voice has
also become so deep, it’s beyond me to understand how he has done this, he calls himself, he is called as 'Roshan' means
'Enlightened One', actually his name is Sanjay but he calls himself Roshan so is all done by him, lyrics and voices but the music is
done by a very famous music director called Sapan Jagmohan from India.
Now the people who have sung here is Kavita Krishnamurthy, she is a very famous background singer then there is Jagmohan
himself and the two sisters you know them, Bakre sisters from Pune also have sung in this one. So, this is the second one which
also I declare as open now to you for you to purchase it and now I have done the inauguration of these two things.
Now there is one thing to be realized I want to make it very clear to you, to make this music they have to go to studios which are
very expensive and they have to employ the people who belong to the studio itself and it’s a very expensive process and that’s
why we had to put the price to cover up their expenses plus the amount that is spent in doing them up on cassettes and the
recording of it.
So, all that amount we have included and it’s all with my consent and my understanding the price has been put. So, there should
be no problem in buying those things, it’s perfectly all right, all of them I have seen them very well. Now they are going to give you
some music and after that you people also give them some music and then again, they will end up with the music.

There is a little thing I have to tell you that you can see how Sahaja Yoga can transform people. Every one of them has gone into
a new dimension. I could see today even when they were playing tabla and all that I found everybody has gone into a new
dimension of expertise. It’s very surprising. Their voices are so deep and beautiful that if that is the gift of the Spirit, the world will
know very soon how important it is to achieve your Spirit and to be established into it because you really become dynamic.
So, we have to say goodbye to you and Guru Puja was done with such great devotion, dedication, and enthusiasm and also with
the grace of God all the artists also arrived. There was no chance of their coming till yesterday and everything managed so well
that they are here. You all have also enjoyed the whole thing. Go with your enjoyment. Today you must have learnt that the Guru
teaches you how to enjoy everything. I hope you have learnt how to enjoy everything and to enjoy your life and spirituality, so that
you live in eternal life.
May God bless you all. Thank you very much. May God bless you.

1970-0101, Unidentified Talk About Nizamuddin
View online.
1 January 1970
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
[Note - the talk has been taken from the tape: 1995-03-15 Conversation with Princess Nun Bangkok]
Nations land, where Hazrat Nizamuddin was buried, He was a great nabi and a sufi and in his whole poetry he has used very
symbolic things and for people of that level they do not think of any religion being exclusive. Even Mohammad saheb never
talked only of Islam. He talked of all the people who came before. Like Abraham, then he talked of Moses, then he talked of
Christ and his mother specially in Quran he has talked it. He never talked that I am something separate, never exclusive. They
can never be exclusive because they know that all these great people came on this earth to do the emancipation of human
beings, so they respect each(cough) same as Hazarat Nizamuddin. Long time back before my marriage when I came here I was
the first I think to put a chadar of flowers on him and my father also was a great soul. He told me this is Hazarat Nizamuddin and
his disciple was Kusro was a great poet in Hindi language, he is regarded as a very great poet and he is the one who has written
this beautiful song, now the symbolic is this chap means is the Muslims. Tilaks are the Hindus. I have given up everything once I
met the reality. But it's very deep and beautifully explained and though they were born in the Muslim community, they saw the
reality in every religion and these sufis are everywhere and I am surprised they are in Turkey and also they are now when I went
to Tunisair they are there. All over the world the sufis are there. These are also the sufis but now they have become real Sahaja
Yogi sufis(Shri Mataji laughs) and this is something is exactly the Sahaja yoga. Spontaneously, as soon as I saw you I lost all this
nonsense. Very spontaneous. Sahaj and this is what so beautifully expressed in this song. I read, I read this song when I was a
very young girl. Wanted to see sometimes the tomb of Hazarat Nizamuddin Saheb. He was so great and whose brought so much
luck to this Delhi(unclear) aprat from that we are dam dam saheb(unclear) We have all these great people very dear, it's a very
precious place. So when I, we wanted to have a program here the police people came and told us that don't have it there because
there are lots of Muslims they will kill you. I said what sort of muslims there? They said, they are all disciples of Nizamuddin. I
said, they are my people. Don't worry. They won't do anything to me. I know that. So this oneness of spirit can only be felt by
people who have enlightenment. Those who do not have enlightenment, see everything separated different and fight but those
who are enlightened see. I always give an example of a Marathi poet. He went to, he was was himself a Tailor and he went to see
one another great saint who was just a potter. So this potter was kneading the mud. When this saint the Tailor, Namadeva went
and saw him kneading the mud. He just stopped and looked at him, and what he says that, In Marathi says " Nirgunachabheti
alou sagunachi" meaning, I came to see the aaa, Nirakar, I came to see here formless but here it is formless is in form. That is
you. Only a saint can appreciate a saint. Only can a saint can understand a saint. So, was Nizamuddin saheb, we have say Chisti(
khwaja Moinuddin Chisti), we have got Middin saheb, we have many sufis in India and they are worshipped and respected by all
the communities.
Shiridi Sainath was another one Nath, regarded very great nath panthis. They were all enlightened people. They didn't have this
kind of a nonsense this dharam, that dharam, that dharam,no, for them only oneness with God and these two persons, Ameer
Kusros, poems I wrote when I was very young and I was surprised people never understood him. I wish you all could read his
poetry and understand with a symbolic meaning. May God bless you.

1970-0101, The Great Mother: The story of Sahaja Yoga and Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
View online.
1 January 1970
(Location Unknown)
The ancient land of India, the land once divided amongst waring kings and princes a land troubled over centuries by the
occupation of foreign powers until in the middle of the 20th century India achieved independence and freedom from those who
had ruled her for 300 years.
Despite all their differences of language and religion Indians became united in their efforts to be rid of this foreign rule through
the courage and determination of one man Mahatma Gandhi. Gandhi challenged the might of the British Empire not with guns
but with non-violence with passive resistance and his unshakeable belief in a people's right to be their own masters. Another of
India's great leaders at that time Bal Gangadhar Tilak proclaimed to a British Court on his arrest "freedom is my birthright".
"freedom is my birthright" By 1942 the Indian people saw that their freedom was at last possible and their British rulers began to
fear it. The slogan "quit India" was soon to be found all over the country. Five years later India achieved her birthright of freedom.
One of the young leaders of this campaign for political freedom was a medical student now known as Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
who has since that time dedicated her life to another kind of freedom the freedom of the Spirit through self-realization and the
practice of Sahaja Yoga. It's your birthright as a human being to become the Spirit. That what Sahaja Yoga is. "Saha" means
"with" and "ja" is "born".
Born with you is the right to get this Yoga is the union with the Divine. Is your birthright as a human being you are as I told you at
the epitome of evolution and it has to work out but please open your hearts and open your minds. For thousands of years India
the great land of the Spirit awaited the fulfillment of its ancient prophecies that the great incarnation of the primordial energy the
Adi Shakti would bring a yoga that would create an inner transformation and self mastery for all men This momentous event is
also foreseen by many Indian poets including the great Rabindranath Tagore seen here with Gandhi. The unique experience of
self-realization takes place when the primordial energy called Kundalini is correctly awakened by someone who has already
experienced and mastered their own self-realization. Shri Mataji has explained that the Kundalini is the power of our spiritual
ascent found in the triangular bone at the base of the spine called sacrum by the Greeks. It is the power of our pure desire. When
awakened the Kundalini rises spontaneously through six subtle centers called chakras. The Kundalini then emerges through the
fontanel bone area at the top of the head emitting a cool breeze that can be felt there as well as on the hands. In her desire to
offer self-realization to mankind through Sahaja Yoga Shri Mataji constantly travelled the world. I am not here to take anything
from you.
Nor for a vote from you I am not a politician. I am here to give you the key of your own wealth. There is big inner revolution that is
coming up which is silent joyous and is going to change the whole humanity This was the dream of Lenin who was a realised
soul himself that he wanted to have a stateless state. And realised people don't need any state. You are just there. So you see,
we have to understand that life has to be enjoyable Hello. How are you? Those who have felt cool breeze in their hands or from
their head please raise both your hands please. So many. May God bless you.
Shri Mataji was born in 1923 in the very center of India near the town of Nagpur in the state of Maharashtra. Actually I was born
like this. In a very enlightened family I should say. My father a very enlightened man and he was member of the Assembly,
Central assembly, Member of the constitution. Constituent assembly Parliament. My mother was a honours of mathematics and
my father was a scholar of [unclear - languages] also. It was her father who took her to see Gandhi. When Shri Mataji he was a
young girl Gandhi recognized something unique in her and suggested that the child spend some time with him at the ashram
where she became a frequent visitor over the years. Living abroad and traveling so much allowed Shri Mataji little time at a home
in India but the travelling did not stop. She regularly toured this vast country reaching out to the people in the crowded cities as
well as country villages.

At the end of the 90s the crowds who came to her public programs numbered in their thousands but when Shri Mataji started
teaching Sahaja Yoga in India back in 1970 it was only with a mere handful of people. With the initial 12 people who achieved
their self-realization Shri Mataji was able to establish Sahaja Yoga in India. Then in 1973 Shri Mataji went to live in London. Her
husband mr. now sir CP Srivastava had been elected secretary-general of the International Maritime Organization an agency of
United Nations this brought Shri Mataji into the world of international diplomacy. But in the midst of her life as the wife of a
diplomat then a mother of two children and then a grandmother Shri Mataji has devoted all her efforts to giving self-realization
and bringing Sahaja Yoga to very confused societies desperate for change. One of the effects of Kundalini awakening through
Sahaja Yoga has been to help people with all kinds of serious addictions such as drugs and alcohol and illnesses such as
diabetes and cancer impressive results have attracted the attention of the medical profession around the world. Dr. David Spiro
is a general practitioner in London who has studied the application of Sahaja Yoga as a form of treatment for several years and
who has seen many cures for a variety of problems and a marked increase in the general good health and well-being of people
who practice Sahaja Yoga. I've been involved with Sahaja Yoga and the work of Shri Mataji for about the past 10 years. In India
there's been some scientific studies which have shown the physiological effects of Sahaja Yoga as a form of meditation and
some other studies on two particular illnesses asthma and hypertension which have shown very interesting results they've
shown for example much larger drops in blood pressure than have ever been demonstrated before by any other form of
relaxation or meditation. People around the world have been finding that the awakening of the Kundalini and the practice of
Sahaja Yoga have helped to solve a wide variety of problems of all kinds.
Now at the beginning of the 21st century Sahaja Yoga is being practiced in some 70 countries. They have all combined together
integrated together so peaceful and they lost all these conditionings of their so-called man-made religions or their man-made
boundaries of nations and man-made ideologist. It opens out with truth to everyone. The way there are so many political
changes taking place so dramatically and so fast one should expect a very beautiful world.

1970-0101, Letter in Marathi
View online.
1 January 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
Translation of an Old Marathi Letter I. Probably written in London, c.1975.
My dear Modi and other Sahaja Yogis,
Many blessings. Received your letter. I am very glad to know that your Ida Nadi has become clean and I hope, Ida Nadis of all
have become clean at least to some extent. Here I had told all, that I would work, while under anesthesia, to clean the Ida
channels of all. I worked for 3 days cleaning it by vomiting nearly 50 times every day and it is nice that the cleaning has become
possible. This physical being has to be used for the mission for which it has been taken and therefore I am not bothered by the
illness and other troubles. On the contrary all such and different experiments with this incarnation will have to be performed.
Why are you so anxious about it ? What else is the use of this body ? I never have any pains. All I want is that, in the laboratory of
this body, some work or the other must go on.
Time is short while the work to be done is very big. You cannot do the cleaning of Ida channel only on the strength of your
realisation. I knew that it had to be cleaned from within. In ancient days all seekers had to do this action (Kriya) constantly right
from their childhood at the residences of their gurus at isolated places. The seekers had to do it individually in many lives.
Because, now you have attained the state of collectivity I have done it in collective consciousness. Although you say I have done
it, the distinction of you and I should not be there in collective consciousness. Mantras '’Twam Bhawani, Twam Durga, Twam
Ambika etc.’’ are good for Ida Channel, but when you are established in Sahaja Yoga, you will have to say 'Aham Bhavani’.
However this Mantra can be said only when your purity becomes one with that of 'Aham Bhavani’ and I tell you now itself that
this wiIl happen. After cleaning the Ida Channel I am awakening Pingala Nadi. Sahaja Yogis had become rather lethargic due to
the conditioning of Ida Channel. Laziness and a tendency of avoiding the work was dominating in them. Their attention was
being frittered away on avoiding the work. But I have now started the work of awakening Pingala Channel. All of you should raise
your right hand from right side over your head and leave it on the left side but while doing it, you must apply your will power so
that your desires will materialize.
With the awakening of collectivity, you will have many people to share your work which you are doing alone. The sphere of
Sahasrara envelops your heart. When conditioning of heart is reduced, as if the glass of a lamp becomes clean, rays of ever
resplendent Spirit awaken Sahasrara sheath and the light of bliss spreads, which is felt in Sahasrara. This light enlightens all
sides of colorful heart and decorates it with the qualities which can be described as pleasing, blissful etc. Gradually this state
will grow and become stable within you. Most of the Sahaja Yogis should try this method, but there should not be merely the
mechanical movement of hands.
Whatever you do, it should be done with the faith that you have in worshipping, zeal of a warrior and sensitivity of an artist. There
should be complete purity in the recitation of Mantras to awaken the deities and your heart must be involved in it. Only then the
awakening will take place.
You should understand a simple principle. How can a big fire be lit with a small match stick? Will a wick hold the flame if water is
mixed in the oil? How can those Sahaja Yogis have enlightenment who are using Sahaja Yoga to solve only their own petty
problems? And why should God give them the enlightenment? Lighthouses do not show light to themselves even for a moment.
Therefore, they are considered so important and are looked after.
Please circulate this letter among all Sahaja Yogis.
Your Mother, NIRMALA

1970-0101, Unidentified Evening Program, Divine music will be eternal
View online.
1 January 1970
Date Unknown
Evening Program
(India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
You see, in India, we have like different families for music.
Like kiran guana agrana all kinds of garranas we have. The specialty of Maharashtra is [?]. Is the music that they sing In the
dramas in the [?] you have heard her singing so all the time. The actor is standing and singing, actress is standing and singing.
They have to remember by heart everything and it's a very fast number, always a very, very fast number uh it's not easy to sing
those songs, so I requested her to at least sing one song from Nati Sangeet because that's the essence of Maharashtraan
music. After this Great Music programme, I don't know what to say in words. But I must say they are all Sahaja Yogis. They have
come to Sahaja Yoga, they have got the realisation. And all these great artists are now coming to Sahaja Yoga so easily.
It's, they are our family. And the closeness we feel for them you can see it in the music even if you don't understand the words.
The way you see they penetrate into your being because they are Sahaja Yogis. And the also, the Songs they have chosen were
very, very remarkable and beautiful. I really don't know how to thank they are my children. I don't know what to say, but the only
thing I say that you should continue with your music. And all my blessings, not only that, but I would do anything to spread this
music all over the world, and we have now. And we have now such an audience. Such a musical audience, you can see that. And
such a report was established.
Shows that this Divine music will be eternal and eternally spreading all over. May God bless you all the listeners and also the
musicians. May God bless.

1970-0101, Two quotes from "The Origins of the Nervous System" dated 1993-1106
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
It must be mentioned that Sahaja Yoga is not for curing people but for achieving Self-realization. Thus as a by-product one gets
physical, mental and spiritual well-being in totality. The Spirit is reflected in the heart but the seat is above the fontanelle bone
area.

1970-0101, Ushering in the Satya Yuga (THE LIFE ETERNAL, 1981 ISSUE, PAGE 1)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Ushering in the Satya Yuga
Human beings have various sources through which he constructs the picture of God Almighty. His ideas about truth are also
based on these different sources. Before realization it is .not possible to know what is the real source and which is the imaginary
plight. When people construct on their own and write books it gets confirmed by the masses as the authentic version.
For a real seeker it is necessary to open the mind to receive the light of self-realization. He should not discard or accept anything
before the self-realization. Because none of the knowledge whether real or fake has granted self-realization. About Kundalini and
spiritual happening also there are many books. Some of them are correct, some of them confused and some of them are
absolutely false.
When one. gets realization the being acts like a computer as if the inner subtle mechanism has been connected with the mains.
Through vibrations of chaitanya which appeal like cool breeze one can detect for oneself as to what is reality. The Being realizes
that it becomes the carrier of the dynamic force of Divine Love. He understands and records its working. Then only one realizes
the meaning of human personality which has evolved from an amoeba to this stage. The totality of man is felt through the
spiritual synthesis of physical, emotional and mental beings.
And, if it works like child’s play why should you worry how it’s done? If you are hungry you should start eating. I leave it to your
wisdom and to your freedom to feel the longing from inside.
Sahaja Yoga is the fantastic gift of Nature that has revealed truths for the emancipation and evolution of the human race. So far
our evolution has taken place without our knowledge, but the ascent of man now is going to be in his full awareness. In
thousands of years man could not reach the moon, but to-day it is possible. The ignorant do not believe of the human landing on
the moon. In the same way those who learnt about God through books, and not through Sahaja meditation, are equally ignorant.
They have always denied incarnations, real prophets and real gurus.
On the tree of life there might have been very few flowers, but now the blossom time has come. Their fragrance of longing has
collectively materialised the manifestation of Sahaja Yoga. Many are going to jump into the realm of Thoughtless Awareness
where you get introduced to yourself and start identifying with your Universal Nature. Let us open our hearts and receive the
blessings of God Almighty. Through Sahaja Yoga only can the Satya Yuga be felt in the human heart.

1970-0101, Quote (THE LIFE ETERNAL, 1980 ISSUE, PAGE 50)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Is there a possibility of this love expressed in the unity of human beings with God Almighty giving a new vision to the apparent
diversities?

1970-0101, Quote (THE LIFE ETERNAL, 1980 ISSUE, PAGE 48)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
"This. is the era of Enlightenment; One can see and feel the bubbling of new idioms in our creative world of Art, Music and all that
is beautiful and joy giving. Integration is the key note of this new regeneration of universal tones. These tones are ripples of the
harmonic, dynamic undercurrent music of the Universal Divine Love."

1970-0101, Quote (THE LIFE ETERNAL, 1980 ISSUE, PAGE 13)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
"Nothing is easier than turning on the light in a room. You must press the switch button. But there is a big mechanism that works
it out - wires, power houses and the whole process of scientific discovery which mastered the use of electricity, there is a long
history behind the discovery of electricity. In the same way there ·is a great dynamic organisation that works out Self Realization,
let us first switch on your lamps and in their light we can understand the mechanism much better."

1970-0101, Two quotes (MAHA AVATAR, ISSUE 1, JUL-SEP 1980, PAGE 11)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Two quotes (MAHA AVATAR, ISSUE 1, JUL-SEP 1980, PAGE 11)
"The New revolution in your awareness has to take place otherwise all human achievements have no meaning. It would be like
arranging all the electrical decorations for the marriage without the electrical current But when the light be on, you will seethe
Bridegroom and the Bride."
"My children, you must know I am beyond insults and Pain. Do you know that when Christ was crucified he was a witness to his
pain ? He can never be humiliated. But these people are under the pressure of the satanic forces. We have to save them. Do you
want them to go to hell ?"

1970-0101, Message (MAHA AVATAR, ISSUE 1, JUL-SEP 1980)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Message (MAHA AVATAR, ISSUE 1)
"Today, Sahaja Yaga has reached the state of Mahayoga, which is en-masse evolution manifested through it. It is this day's Yuga
Dharma. It is the way the last judgement is taking place. Announce it to all the seekers of truth, to all the nations of the world, so
that nobody misses the blessings of the divine to achieve their meaning, their absolute, their spirit."

1970-0101, Quote on Shri Agni (ANANT JEEVAN, ISSUE 4, FEB-APR 1980)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Quote on Shri Agni
Remark: Quote possibly from 1979 Holi PujaMain Texts:
“Agni is the best purifier. It also enlightens, glows and destroys the evil. It is the best of all earth elements and the worst also.
It can burn you as well”
Mataji

1970-0101, BEWARE, DEAR ASPIRANTS (THE LIFE ETERNAL, 1980 ISSUE, PAGE 25)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
BEWARE, DEAR ASPIRANTS
BEWARE, DEAR ASPIRANTS .THERE IS A JUDAS WITHIN US . BE CAREFUL. HE WALKS WITH US, WORKS WITH US. SINGS THE
PRAISES OF THE DIVINE MOTHER, BUT HE IS AN UGLY SERPENT, THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SATAN, WHO IS IN DISGUISE.
HE HELPED TO CRUCIFY CHRIST IN A SLY MANNER. HE MAY BE A WOMAN LIKE POOTANA, WHO CAME TO POISON THE
CHILD KRISHNA.
LET US ALL KNOW THE ONENESS IN OUR MOTHER’S LOVE. AND TAKE GUIDANCE IN THE BURNING FLAME OF HER DIVINITY.
GUARD AGAINST SUCH SHIP SINKERS IN THE SHIP OF SAHAJA YOGA.
MAY GOD GIVE YOU KNOWLEDGE TO KNOW THE EVIL GENIUS – THE NEGATIVITY PERSONIFIED.
“SRI MATAJI”
LET 1980 PDF

1970-0101, Sahaja Yoga a Unique Discovery (THE LIFE ETERNAL, 1980 ISSUE, PAGES 3--8)
View online.
1 January 1970
Quote
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Sahaja Yoga - A Unique Discovery
by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, 1979
The beautiful article, A Unique Discovery was written by Shri Mataji Herself in 1979, and appeared in a magazine called “Yoga
Today”, which does not exist any more. The image shows what it originally looked like in the magazine.
MAN in his search of joy and happiness is running away from his Self, which is the real source of joy. He finds himself very ugly
and boring because he doesn’t know his Self. A human being seeks joy in money or possessions, in power or human limited love,
and ultimately in religion that is also outside. The problem is how to turn one’s attention inward. The inner being, which is our
awareness, is energy. I call it the energy of Divine Love. All evolution and the manifestation of material energy is guided by the
supreme energy of Divine Love. We do not know how powerful and thoughtful this unknown energy is. The silent working of
awareness is so automatic, minute, dynamic, and precious that we take it for granted. After self realisation, this energy appears
to us as silent throbbing vibrations flowing through our being. But we have been unable to achieve self realisation because we
cannot fix our attention on something that lacks form (abstract Being). Instead, our attention wanders outside on forms.
Now there is a method to tap the Divine power - Sahaja Yoga. At the very outset, I have to say that the working of Sahaja Yoga is
very simple, although the operation within is quite complex. For example, if you want to watch television, it is very easy. But to
explain the engineering technique of a television set is very difficult and the explanation is complicated. To learn about a
television you also need a qualified engineer who understands it and who can explain its working.
I will try to explain Sahaja Yoga in the simplest way, but please note that it is really complicated if you want to know it in detail.
The best way to enjoy television is first to switch it on and watch. Then later you can try to understand its engineering. As a
Mother I would say that I have done the cooking for you. Why should you worry about how it is done? If you are hungry you
should start eating. If you are not actually hungry, but only inquisitive, what can I do? I can neither force you to eat nor make you
hungry with discussions or lecturing. I leave it to your wisdom and to your freedom to feel that longing.
SOME BACKGROUND ON SAHAJA YOGA
The word ‘Sahaja’ (Saha + ja) means born with you or inborn. Whatever is inborn manifests without any effort. Hence Sahaja
Yoga is the name given to my system, which is effortless, easy, and spontaneous. It is a part of Nature, you may call it life’s
source-the vitality of the Divine.
To understand life, consider the case of something that is living: a germinating seed. The seed grows by itself into a tree, blooms
into flowers, and then the flowers become fruit. Any human effort cannot change the process of growth from a seed into a tree.
The gardener can only look after the growth of the tree. In the same way, the process of the growth of our consciousness, to
further evolution, takes place effortlessly.
When a foetus is between two and three months old, in the mother’s womb, a column of rays of consciousness, emitted through
the all-pervading Divine Love, pass through the developing brain to enlighten it. The shape of the human brain is prism-like. So,
the column of rays falling on it gets refracted into four diverse channels corresponding to the four aspects of the nervous
system.
These are:
1. Parasympathetic nervous system
2. Sympathetic nervous system (right)
3. Sympathetic nervous system (left)
4. Central nervous System (This need not be discussed as it is the link with objectivity).

The set of rays that fall on the fontanel bone (apex of the head known as Taloo) pierce in the center and pass straight into the
medulla oblongata through a channel (Sushumna). This energy, after leaving a very thread-like, thin line in the medulla oblongata,
settles down in three and a half coils in the triangular bone at the base of the spinal cord (Mooladhar). This coiled energy is
known as Kundalini.
The subtle energy enters through the center of the brain (Sahasrara Brahmarandhra) and precipitates six more centers on its
way down. The gross manifestation of this subtle energy, in the Sushumna channel of the spinal cord, is termed the
Parasympathetic nervous system. The centers of Chakras are expressed as plexuses outside the spinal cord. Surprisingly, we
have the same number of plexuses and sub plexuses outside, as the number of Chakras and their petals inside, the spinal cord.
Medical science knows very little about this system. Science calls it the autonomous nervous system, meaning the system that
works spontaneously-on its own. For example, if we want to increase the rate of our heartbeat, we can do so by exerting
ourselves (activity of the sympathetic nervous system). But we cannot directly reduce the heart (activity of the parasympathetic
nervous system). The parasympathetic nervous system is a system that is like a petrol pump through which the petrol of Divine
Love fills us. But when a human child is born and the umbilical cord breaks, a gap is created in the Sushumna (the subtle channel
in the spinal cord). And on the gross level, one can see there is a gap between the solar plexus and the vagus nerve of the
parasympathetic nervous system. This gap is known as the void in the Zen system of religion and Maya (or Bhav- Sagar) in
Indian thought. Later when ego and superego bloat up like balloons and cover our brain at the apex of the left and right
sympathetic nervous systems, the fontanel bone calcifies, and the all-pervading vital force of Divine Love gets cut off
completely.
Then the human being identifies himself as a separate entity and the consciousness of ‘I’ (Aham) presides. This is why Man
does not know His universal unconscious. His ego severs this subtle connection.
VITAL ENERGY
The sympathetic nervous system uses the vital energy. There are two systems-left and right. The two channels, which carry this
energy, in subtle form (in the medulla oblongata), are known as Ida and Pingala respectively. The right-side system (in the
right-handed person) caters to the emergencies of the active consciousness (extra efforts and emergencies). The left-side
system (in medicine they say it remains dormant) caters to the subconscious mind of the psyche (libido).
Both these sympathetic-nerve systems are called the Sun and Moon channels (i.e., Surya nadi and Chandra nadi). Hatha Yoga
comes from the words Ha and Tha, meaning the Sun and Moon. By this yoga you can control the activity of the sympathetic; you
can use more stored energy or else completely stop the activity of the sympathetic for a short time. Just by using the stored
energy you cannot achieve the eternal flow of the Divine. With control over the sympathetic you can slow the heart rate or even
stop the heart for a short time. You may achieve all the physical gross symptoms of the parasympathetic. But you cannot
activate the parasympathetic which is the channel for your real yoga (meeting of the Divine). With Hatha Yoga you may even
control your mind. But the mind thus governed is heavily conditioned for the spiritual flight into the divine. One may keep good
health and good mind to be a good citizen in a society, but that is not the only aim of life.
THE CHANNELS OF ATTENTION
Both sympathetic and parasympathetic act on the plexuses, but in opposition to each other. The parasympathetic relaxes the
plexuses while the sympathetic squeezes the energy by constricting them. One fills in the vitality and the other consumes it.
There is a gap in the parasympathetic nervous system (Sushumna) but no gap in the sympathetic nervous system (at the navel).
This is the hurdle that has rendered all our searching-and entry into the parasympathetic-fruitless so far. It is like three ladders,
two of them touching the ground while the central one is hanging in the air. So whenever we try to rise in our consciousness, we
move on to the sympathetic system.
If we pass toward the right side we enter onto the activity that goes on bloating in the balloon of ego. Thus we feel responsible
and active. When this activity increases beyond limits, like a growing tree whose roots are not equally grown, the being falls to
the ground.
Over activity of the sympathetic nervous system causes tension, sleeplessness, and ultimately all deadly diseases like cancer.
These diseases are caused by the constricted plexuses that have been drained of their energy. If you can make the

parasympathetic dominate the right side, then we can antidote the effects of over activity. Then all the diseases and the effects
caused by this right side get cured automatically.
The left side sympathetic nervous system (libido) has the power to store all that is dead in us. It connects you with store houses
of the subconscious mind and with the collective subconscious (Bhootlok or Paralok).
At the backside of the brain, at the apex of this channel, the super ego exists like a balloon. It becomes heavy by storing, the
conditioning of the mind through libido. So if the tension is heavy it breaks the superego into many fragments. If you still
overexert by conditioning, a partial vacuum forms and this sucks another dead personality from the collective subconscious
(Paralok) into your superego. So in your pursuit of truth, if you take to further efforts and indulge in concentration, training of the
mind, forced abstinence, forced meditation, or complete slavery to the emotional attachment of the mind, the libido with the aid
of the affected superego may connect you to the collective subconscious (Paralok) where all dead souls-bad, good, or
saintly-exist. These souls start manifesting through you and you get siddhis or extra sensory perceptions. Actually these are the
different subtle (dead) personalities dominating us through super ego.
DANGEROUS TECHNIQUES
There is another method that may be effortlessly employed by many so called teachers. This method, by which they turn the
Chakra in the direction of the libido, can put you into your subconscious. This method either makes the aspirant go into a trance
or accept the complete domination of the dead spirits introduced by the teacher through the plexuses.
In the first case, the Sadhaka feels relaxed, his mind is switched off. But after a few years of practice, he realises his weakness.
He cannot face reality and takes to heavy use of drugs. In the second case, the aspirant becomes a complete slave of the
teacher and starts giving away all material possessions to the teacher without understanding the logic behind it. These teachers
never explain the technique they have employed, nor do they give their powers to anybody else. In short, all efforts in the name of
religion, or the mishandling of Kundalini by so called realised people, can only activate the sympathetic nervous system (Ida and
Pingala). These activities cannot make any progress toward bringing about the play of parasympathetic (Sushumna).
All mesmerize powers such as materialization power (enslaving masses for money or fame), visionary powers (Drishti Siddha),
speech powers (Vani Siddha), curing powers, transcendental feelings (powers of switching off the mind), separation of body,
and many other powers, are very ordinarily found among those who practice the control of spirits (Pret siddhi or Smashan
Vidya). All such powers can be proved to be the powers of the dead in any one of our experimental Centers.
These are not Divine powers because the Divine has no interest in these gross subjects. It is interested only in the miracle of the
inner being and its further manifestation to bring about human evolution. Thus those who indulge and use their attention (Chitta)
on such ‘siddhis’ and those who run after such gross miracles find it difficult to follow Sahaja Yoga.
We have noted that when such people confront Sahaja Yoga, they start trembling and shaking like lunatics. If with very great
difficulty such a person reaches the state of Self-realisation, he completely loses all interest in such powers and in their
exhibition. He is freed of all extra dead personalities who dominated him.
There is no need to pass through the subconscious strata to jump the unconscious. The subconscious is an end by itself and
one gets lost after entering its realms. These strata are placed vertically. The only direct way is through the parasympathetic
(through Sushumna)-the central path that takes you to the Divine (the universal unconscious)-through Sahaja Yoga.
It is very dangerous to use the powers of the subconscious which may become uncontrollable and torture the practitioner and
Sadhaka. Those who are temporarily benefited may suffer irreparable loss to body, mind, or grace.
THE PROMISED GOAL
All religions have promised inner silence when you reach the state of Self-realisation-the inner miracle of the subtle awareness
and not gross jugglery. The Bhagavad Gita says that you become the witness (Sakshi Swarup) of the play of the Divine. Many
modern thinkers are also talking about the new awareness. This has been described as ‘thoughtless awareness’ which results in
collective consciousness. We hear of many prophesies made by ancient and modern writers about the evolution of a new race of
super-human beings of unique awareness. These are no longer empty words. Through the discovery of Sahaja Yoga it is
possible to achieve the transformation of the human consciousness to the higher planes promised by various seers.
The subject of Kundalini is no longer a matter of book knowledge. Now you can see, with the naked eye, the breathing of the
Kundalini at the Mooladhara. You can feel the different Chakras in the spinal cord with your fingers. Formerly, bridging the gap in
the Sushumna was the insurmountable problem. But it is being discovered that this gap can be filled with the vibrating power of

Divine Love. The Kundalini rises like a majestic mother and breaks the apex of the brain (Brahmarandhra) without giving the
slightest trouble to the child (Sadhaka). It happens in a split second, in the short spell between two successive thoughts. Of
course, if the aspirant (Sadhaka) is diseased or his Chakras are constricted by over activity of the sympathetic nervous system,
the Kundalini, being the Mother of every individual and the embodiment of love, knowledge, and beauty, knows how to reveal Her
love beautifully and to give rebirth to Her child without causing any hurt. There are many descriptions about Kundalini warning us
against the dangers and perils of the taming of Kundalini. Also many books describe various gross or frightful experiences of the
Kundalini awakening.
Actually this is caused because Kundalini cannot rise without Sahaja Yoga, i.e., if someone, who is not Self-realised, tries to
awaken Her, the Kundalini does not leave Her seat and, without the proper invitation, the Kundalini becomes adamant and angry.
Thus the sympathetic gets into activity. When She is accused of sex, She sends heat waves over the sympathetic nervous
system which causes the constriction or blockage of the plexuses and the path of the Kundalini is completely broken down.
Sometimes one gets into funny gesticulations or loses complete awareness of the outside. Moreover with mishandling of
Chakras and Kundalini due to the ignorance or greed of the teacher, the chance of realisation for the aspirant can become very
poor and sometimes impossible.
The mind that is very much conditioned, or the mind that is the slave of self-indulgence or of egoistic actions and thoughts, is
also a very slow conveyance for Sahaja Yoga. Even if you read too much about the de-conditioning of the mind, you may get only
further conditioned. If you try to de-condition by efforts, you can become conditioned much worse than what you were.
De-conditioning is only possible through Divine Love. The main ‘condition’ of Sahaja Yoga is that your will and freedom are
always respected.
In Sahaja Yoga the person is fully aware and alert and receives inner silence and experience without doing any unnatural
movements. He sits in a completely easy pose throughout or he also may lie down (Sahajasana or Shavasana). The breathing is
normal or less than normal.
RELIGION
Religions are also the expressions and experiments of realised souls-the seers. They also talk about the inner being, second
birth, and about realization. In the beginning, in India, they tried to take the attention inside by introducing symbols that they saw
of this unconscious, universal being within. This gave rise to pantheism and the aspirant’s attention got stuck to symbols (Sakar)
and to rituals which killed the main objective.
So the other type of experiments of talking only about the abstract (Nirakar) gave rise to many other religions which ended up as
dogmas or ‘isms.’ The reason is obvious. Talking about the flower or the honey cannot take you to the honey but can only create
dogmatic ‘isms’ in the mind. You have to be a bee to reach there, i.e., you have to be reborn. This has to happen within to take
you inside. It is too great an achievement and unbelievable, but I feel the search of ages has brought great results.
THE END OF THE PATH
The mind, with a child-like innocence achieves very quick results. Whatever may be the loads of the mind, if the longing is honest
and earnest, sooner or later, the aspirant can get Self-realisation. After reaching this state the vibrations start emitting from the
extremities. These are described by Adi Shankaracharya in his work ‘Ananda Lahari.’ These vibrations are the waves of Divine
Love that can fill also other persons’ inner being and give them the same experience of Self-realisation. This is how the chain
reaction starts. One light enlightens another.
The physical manifestations are as follows:
The pupils of the eyes become dilated (Parasympathetic action). The face becomes radiant, the body becomes light, all tension
is completely removed. The rising of the Kundalini can be seen by others and felt by the aspirant. First the throbbing is clearly felt
at Sahasrara (apex of the brain) and when it stops, complete silence is felt within and in all awareness. The flow of grace is felt
coming down, cooling the whole being. As the attention moves to the subtle, gross attachments drop out. A person gradually
loses identification with falsehood and artificiality.
In matter, he sees beauty and not its possession value. In knowledge, he identifies himself with the Truth and is not afraid to
profess, nor does he indulge in the double standards of life. His flow of love becomes spontaneous, generous, without any tinge
of attachment, possession or any return. The person becomes ageless-a hollow personality.
Now let us see what happens inside.

The attention of the consciousness moves to the inner being (Kundalini). As the thread (Sutra) of a necklace is passing through
every bead of the necklace, the inner consciousness (Kundalini) is also passing through every human being.
As soon as our attention moves to our inner consciousness we can move on to everybody’s Kundalini. One starts feeling the
Kundalini, its nature, its position in other persons. Collective consciousness is thus established. Now you become a universal
being. After some days you cannot say who the other person is. The power of love is so great and dynamic that with the
movement of your fingers you can move the Kundalini of thousands. It becomes child’s play.
This is how the en masse evolution of human beings will take place. These are the signs of the advent of the Golden age of Truth
(Satya Yoga).
Let us forget whatever hardships we have suffered in our search in the past. It does not matter if some could not find it before
this. You have to open your mind and understand that though the discovery is unprecedented, it does not make any seeker or
predecessor small. If some experiments are made, it does not matter if, ultimately, we have found out the way. It is a collective
achievement. Perhaps in the chaos of Kali Yoga it was to happen and many of us, who have been earnestly searching in many
lives, are reborn to have their promises fulfilled by the Divine. Maybe we were our own predecessors.
On the tree of life there might have been very few flowers but now the blossom time has come. Their fragrance of longing has
collectively materialized the manifestation of Sahaja Yoga. Many are going to jump into the realm of thoughtless awareness
where you get introduced to yourself and start identifying with your universal nature.
Those who deserve will get the throne of their inner being which rules the skies of peace, and the oceans of divine love and
supreme knowledge within, which is limitless (Anand).

1970-0321, Birthday Puja (year unknown)
View online.
21 March 1970
Birthday Puja
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
HH Shri Mataji, Birthday Puja Public Program, Mumbai, India
[Yoginis singing a welcome song ends 6’55”]
I bow to all the seekers of truth. It is very kind of you all to have come to celebrate my birthday.
It’s all your goodness. In modern times, who looks after the mother? One of the signs of modern times is that the parents will be
neglected by the children. They may have to stay in an orphanage. But I find all of you here with such love, with such affection, all
the way from all distances, you have come to greet your Mother. Words stop at this point. I cannot understand the love that is
pouring so much like an ocean over Me. I just get lost into the beautiful feeling of a Mother who has thousands of children, who
are so kind and also after my image of a good son or a good daughter.
We had another great mother here, in this Maharashtra, was Jijabai, Jija Mata. And she is the one she had an image [unsure] of
her son, that one day her son will be able to establish the kingdom of God, of honesty, of freedom, of character. Such ”
Yuvapurushas” are born in many years.
Even his son could not come up to his standard, to his character.
The way he respected the daughter-in-law of Kalyan Subhedar, the way he came towards people, the way he led a life of dynamic
bhakti. Such people are rarely born and he could not even create someone like him.
But today, I am so very fortunate to have children of your great character, understanding and such spiritual values. Sahaja Yoga
has created a new culture of spiritual value. The value system has taken a funny shape in the modern times but in these modern
times only when the shackles of this horrible culture – whether you call it eastern, western, modern, ancient, anything, because
all of them have gone to the collapsible stages. One finds a new culture, a new life, a new age of a new race coming up.
I am so gratified that you are all here to represent that culture of spiritual values, where we do not believe in any separatist
ideals. We are not reactions. We do not react to any concept. We are self-made, standing on our self-experiences and the truth,
that is so evident. We are not the people who have taken to a kind of a violent or peaceful – if you call it – reaction to the society.
Like we have many organizations today I find, “This is a reaction to this, that is a reaction to that”.
This is not the society that is demanding anything like money, power – nor is it a society that calls itself a downtrodden or
underprivileged people. It is the most privileged society we have today [unsure]. The essence of this privilege is that you are all
Yogis, you are all saints, you are all Safiyas [pure]. That there is satisfaction in your heart, that now the time has come to give, no
more asking for oil or for light. What you have got is the light and the oil all the time flowing in you. You have to just spread this
love into the whole world. Such confidence of love, such modesty of dynamism, such sharpness of compassion, such deep
peace. Its prevalent in the society of Sahaja Yogis: the friendship, the love like many waves of beautiful thoughts and feelings.
This ocean of a new understanding of a higher life, of a sober life, of a sublime life has to break all the barriers, all the
nonsensical work.
Today we are facing face-to-face, thank God. Due to fundamentalist, due to fanatics, due to non-believers, due to politicians,
economics, scientists, all of them, who are conditioned by whatever false path they have created. Scientists are very much more

conditioned than anybody else. They just refuse to accept that there is God Almighty above us. They are not scientists, because
they have no open-mindedness. If you don’t have an open-mindedness, you are not a scientist.
Now the time has come for you to prove the existence of God and His realm, which gives us security, peace and joy. About
Kundalini – I don’t know how many lectures I’ve given and have worked it in so many ways that it should be appreciated,
understood, knowledgeable to all of you. Only the knowledge of Kundalini is not going to help us at all. You might find some
people who have much more knowledge of Kundalini than some of you have. They might have read at least hundred books on
Kundalini, but it is not known to them, its not the knowledge. It has to be within [unsure], it has to be known on your central
nervous system. It has to be in your being, that you should be able to know what is Kundalini. As soon as you see somebody you
should know where he stands – as far as spirituality is concerned. As soon as you feel the atmosphere, you should know where
you are as far as God’s realm is concerned.
I must tell you a story. Once I was travelling with my husband in Kashmir and just in a very wild place, I felt tremendous
vibrations. And I said, “From where do these vibrations are coming?” So, my husband said, “How can you have vibrations in this
forlorn place?” He asked the driver. He said, “No, there is no temple, nothing here, it’s a very wild place.” I said, “All right, let’s go
the way this road is”. And we went one way ahead, about five miles and there, some Muslims, poor Muslims were living there. So,
the driver asked them, is there a temple here? They said, “No, there is no temple. But about a mile ahead there is the Hazratbal
(Mosque).” Hazratbal was the one hair of Mohammad Sahab. Can you imagine the vibrations? I caught them about 5-6 miles
away, from one hair of Mohammad Sahab.
When we deny Mohammad, or when we deny Christ, when we deny Krishna or we deny Dattatreya, we are denying the truth,
because they are all one. There’s no difference. They are like flowers on one tree of life. We are not their judge. They are our
judge. We are not to judge them, we haven‘t got that capacity to judge them. What capacity we have, that we have to achieve,
that we have to reach, that has to mature. The spirituality has to mature to that extent where it Hazrat Nizamudin or it is Chishti
or it is Sainath. You should see nothing but Dattatreya present in them. For that you have to have that sight of Kabira. You have
to have that growth of Nanaka. Otherwise, we just talk.
Those who have understood Sahaja Yoga have understood that all these barriers of religion has no meaning. It‘s all integrated,
well-woven and worked out beautifully by sending all these Incarnations, all these Great Prophets on this Earth. To create the
humanity which is described by Confucius. To create valencies, our valencies, which are 10 valencies that we call as Dharma, of
a human Dharma, which is described by Confucius. It is described in different, different ways no doubt, but still, he says the
same thing, same tone. As I said this morning Sahaja Yoga has only one theme and that is pure love. It has no greed, it has no
lust, it has no ambitions, nothing! It has nothing but pure love flowing through your channels to the whole world.
I hope we have achieved a very great height [unsure]. To think that we have people from all over the world who follow this path of
Sahaja Yoga. Now it is for others to see whether they can come up through all this turmoil [unsure] because Sahaja Yoga is not a
thing where you can be a member, you can pay some money or you can sort of put a sign-board that I am a Sahaja Yogi. Its the
becoming of Sahaja Yoga is important. Those who have that capacity will come to us. Don’t you worry if the whole world doesn’t
come. For Me, you are the world. Those who want to come, can join us and can enjoy themselves, can have that. We cannot run
after them, we cannot fall at their feet, that come along – take to God. Let them themselves come on their own and enjoy the
beauty of their own being, which is created by God specially for them.
Today, I must say that every year, the age reduces in a way because you are going towards your goal. But one has to remember
that every year you mature. You mature like a seed comes up to a tree, then becomes a flower and ultimately a fruit. And the fruit
has to fall again to the ground, to give the resurgence of the same. In the same way whatever it is, whether the time is passing,
one has to just judge how far have I matured in compassion, in love, in understanding of the truth. How far I can stand against all
the atrocities done to others who are suffering. We have to open our eyes to the society, to our surroundings, to our country, to
other countries, to everyone. We have to be alert. It’s not to be enjoyed only by you. It is to be given to others and for that those
who come to us, we have to tell them.

I am sure one day will come many will open their eyes and see for themselves that the only solution for this world’s turmoil is
Self Realisation, to know the Self, that still they are not fully there yet. Once it happens I am sure, I am very, very sure that this
world will become a beautiful garden of oneness.
May God bless you all!
Audience applauds.
22’45”
Indian Sahaja Yogi: By the grace of Shri Mataji, it has, all they have teached is that one must read [unsure] everyday regarding
this program [unsure] of Shri Mataji. May I, while passing make a remark, that Shri Mataji with Her own mantras has given a
different interpretation all together. Shri Mataji, with Her own interpretations, has given a different, all together, meaning to Gita,
Quran, what Nanak Sahab has said, and our Sahaja Yogis have been writing about it. One such, our Sudhakar, has written this
strotram Nirananda and I would request Shri Mataji to have Her blessings on this, this is strotram Nirananda. (Audience
applauds)
Another Sahaja Yogi: Most Holy Mother, Shri Mataji, Shri Nirmala Devi, all of us who are Sahaja Yogis, we bow to You. We thank
You very much for having given us the Self Realisation, for having given us what we know as love. Today with Your shining words
You have given us depth, which we are and which we look forward to. I thank all of you who have come here today to celebrate
with us, on this great occasion of Shri Mataji’s birthday. All of us who are Sahaja Yogis over here, we promise You, O Mother, that
Your works, through us will carry far and to all corners of the world and with Your blessings, this world can be a different place.
Thank You very much. (Audience applauds)
Sahaja Yogi: Jai Shri Mataji!

1970-0423, Letter
View online.
23 April 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
23rd April
My Dear Raol Bai
Lots of Blessings!
After coming back from Mumbai, I went to Geneva and after coming back, I started working in London. You took great care of us,
looked after us like flowers, then who will fill that void when we come here? I often feel that it is not right to get used to such
comforts.You welcomed us so well at your home, you personally covered all the expenses. It comes to mind that you must have
faced so much trouble, that you welcomed all the Sahaja Yogis at your home, perhaps I also couldn’t have done it, there are
many things worth thinking about. Anyway, all this is a play of Sahaja Yoga, it is right that we watch it! Shonu has been sent back
to school. She will go on holidays after a month. After that she will study in Modern School, Delhi. Now her problem is solved.
She misses you a lot. She was saying that I will send a saree for Raul Bai. She is very loving.
The work of Sahaja Yoga is going on in full swing. And it seems that something big will be achieved in a few days. Dhule's
program was very good. The editor of Tarun Bharat also got realization, if Sahaja Yoga gets established in Pune then the work
will be done. Dhumal Sahab's letter had come and he has started a center in Shrirampur. Besides, Ahmednagar center has also
started growing rapidly. Chavan Saheb has many acquaintances in Dhule. Familiarize yourself with all of them. By the way,
Dhumal ji's son-in-law's father lives in Chalisgaon, take his advice also, and his son-in-law lives near your Dhule, so visit his
village. Your son and daughter-in-law have progressed a lot, the brilliance of Sahaja Yoga shines in all the children. I was very
happy to see this. My greetings to Raul ji, blessings to the young & elders.
Mother Nirmala who always remembers you.

1970-0921, Letter of Shri Mataji, written to Raol
View online.
21 September 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
*In the following letter, Shri Mataji is talking about Gagangiri Maharaj and his disciple Madhukar Rao. Madhukar Rao has written
the aarti for Shri Mataji. The word Madhu in the verse "Jab Dil mein aaye tab *madhu* sangeet sun lo" has become *madhur*
over the years. But originally it represented his name.
Therefore, instead of including his name, Raol Ba always used to sing "Jab Dil mein aaye tab *sahaj* sangeet sun lo".
21st September
My dear Chhotu,
Many many blessings,
My trip to America has been postponed to next year. There are many reasons for this, but the real reason is that it is just not the
right (Sahaja) time now. Therefore, it was not possible to go. Preparation for America will be needed.I will go in August next year.
It is very good that a meeting happened with Maharaj. He had told me that you should send Sahaja yogis to me and I will guide
them further in meditation. But the experiences of people of Mumbai are strange. Therefore, those people hesitate. When
Avadhoot and Meenakshi went to Maharaj, both got caught up at their Agya Chakra, keeping them in a state of trance all the
time. Secondly, More (A Family Name) and other sahaja yogis went to Maharaj and became unstable. People from Vasai and
Bordi welcomed him wholeheartedly, at my behest and all those people deteriorated.
In between, Maharaj sent Madhukar Rao. While he wrote my praise, it was all borrowed (asking from others) knowledge. And the
same happened with Khade. Then the people of Mumbai asked me, "What is this matter?"
The reason for this is that Maharaj himself is very great and many evil people are around him taking advantage of him. He has
not given realization to anyone. He doesn't say no to anyone. He himself is in bliss and is aware that these all are donkeys. He
told me that you are giving to everyone, as a mother you can give. But it is to be seen what these people give you in return. His
experiences were bad. Till today, experiences of all saints have been bad. But now the number of saints has been increased.
So you are all brothers and sisters. You should love each other completely. If you give more to one and less to another, then
there will be groups. This prevails in Mumbai. I am very tired of this groupism. This is a malignancy in Sahaja yoga. We all are
one. We all are several cells of the same Virata. How can one depend on only one organ?
I told you that you should write about Sahaja yoga based on medical terminology. Gavin Brown is writing a book here. Gregoire is
also writing a book. Then your writing will be useful. Write on theory and experiments.
Blessings to all.
Always your Mother,
Nirmala.

P.S. Please send the writing as soon as possible. - Your Mother, Nirmala.

1970-1029, Letter
View online.
29 October 1970
Letter / Poem
(Location Unknown)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
29th October.
Dear Rajkunwar,
I have learned that your health is not good. The treatment for Jaundice is as follows: Boil tender leaves of radish and mix sugar
candy(rock sugar) with that water. Drink this water repeatedly. Do not drink any other water. Drink water after vibrating.
Secondly, take mustard oil in a copper or brass bowl and move it in a clockwise direction with your fingers (Nabhi chakra finger)
or with all your fingers. One hand, either left or right, should be placed towards the photo. Check your hands alternatively and
keep the hand that feels lighter towards the photo. The oil will slowly turn thick yellow. Do not dump this oil into water, but take it
far away and burn it. Doing this two or three times you will feel better. Avoid using oil and ghee in your food completely. Also,
take vibrations on the Nabhi and liver. Keep the other hand towards the photo.
I am very concerned about you. Please send a letter soon. Also, invoke Vishnu. Bow down and offer prayers by taking names of
Dattatreya and his incarnations.
Chotu’s letter has come from Delhi. I will send him a reply.
Convey Diwali's auspicious blessings to everyone in Dhule.
Always remembering you, your mother, Nirmala.

1972-0101, Letter
View online.
1 January 1972
Letter / Poem
(United States)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
My Dear Children,
What are you searching?
Why are you aimlessly and listlessly running about?
The joy that you have searched in material gains, the joy that you are looking for in power, the joy that disappeared in the words
of books--the so-called knowledge--is all lost in yourself, and you are still searching and seeking!
You can pay attention to everything outside yourself! You are lost in your thoughts, like babes in the wood! But there is great
hope that you can rise into the Heaven of "thoughtless" awareness, which we call Self-realisation.
I invite you to this feast of Divine Bliss, which is pouring around you, even in this Kali-yuga, in these God-forsaken modern times.
I hope you will come and enjoy the spiritual experience of the Life Eternal.
With all My love and blessings.
Your Mother,
NIRMALA

1972-0101, Poem: To My Flower Children
View online.
1 January 1972
Letter / Poem
(United States)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
To My Flower Children
You are angry with life
Like small children
Whose mother is lost in darkness
You sulk expressing despair
At the fruitless end to your journey
You wear ugliness to discover beauty
You name everything false in the name of truth
You drain emotions to fill the cup of love
My sweet children, my darlings
How can you get peace by waging war
With yourself, with your being, with joy itself
Enough are your efforts of renunciation
The artificial mask of consolation.
Now rest in the petals of the lotus flower
In the lap of your gracious mother
I will adorn your life with beautiful blossoms
And fill your moments with joyful fragrance
I will anoint your head with divine love
For I cannot bear your torture anymore
Let me engulf you in the ocean of joy
So you lose your being in the greater one
Who is smiling in your calyx of Self
Secretly hidden to tease you all the while
Be aware and you will find him
Vibrating your every fibre with blissful joy
Covering the whole Universe with light.
Mother Nirmala
This poem was written by Shri Mataji in 1972 on Her first trip to America for the first public programs in Her presence.

1972-0409, Public Program
View online.
9 April 1972
Public Program
Dhule (India)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - Draft
1972-0409 Public Program
A woman like Rajkunwar Raul is in Dhule, this is the great fortune of Dhule. I came here because of the charm of her love. I told
her I would come to Dhule once. And I am becoming aware of how much devotion and love there is in this place.
In our country, everyone has written a lot about religion since ancient times and there has been a lot of discussions. Even in
temples, bells are ringing now, people also go to churches, go to mosques, a lot of work has been done in our country in the
name of religion. But the real work doesn't seem to have happened anywhere. We go to the temple, we do everything properly, we
do everything for the pooja, we come home, but even then we don't feel that we have got anything. The inner peace, inner love,
inner joy, is never found. No matter how much we do, we do not feel that we are close to God. Or we have got this Mauli(Mother),
on whose lap we can rest our head and say comfortably, that we don't want to do anything now.
I am not saying that a person should not go to the temple. Let's go, must go. To identify the honey, let's do flower things first,
then it will be fine. So they created the embodiment of God [just to say / for good], that is, to name the flowers. From Vishnu to
Shiva, as well as from Muslims to Ali to Wali, from Christians to Christ to his mother, everyone had a genealogy. The names are
all known. Even after knowing the names of the flowers, the honey was not found! We worship Sakar, take the name of Vishnu.
See, in his description too, he has said - you may have heard the verse of Vishnu - that “Shantakaram Bhujagashayanam
Padmanabham Suresham. Vishvadharam gagansadrisham meghavarnam shubhangam. Lakshmikant Kamalnayanam. " So far
so good. But where is his fly? "" This is a description of what the yogi knows in meditation. I do not know.
Even about each deity, "Dhyanavasthita tadgaten manasa pashyanti yin yogino." Everywhere you look today, the tide of
protectionist sentiment is flowing. But what happens is we stop at the hint.
Now let us call another type of religion that started, Christianity or Muslim religion. In it, he said, "Look, if we do flower things, we
don't get honey, so let's do honey things." He said that God who is is formless, not materialized, you go into formless. But how to
go? That's what happened. Hey, do things with honey, not flowers, things are things. Things do not know the Supreme. So what
happened is, a horse is tied behind the car and we are driving the car! Saying, "Why doesn't the car run, Dharmachi?" Religion is
within us, everyone has said it. Everyone has said that there is Paramatma inside us. But what happens is that no matter how
much is said, it remains to be said.
I had gone to this (Gurudwara) of a Sikh afternoon. So there he started singing, “Kahe re ban khojan Jai. Sada Nivasi Sada Alepa
Tohe Sang Samai" (why you are going out in search? it’s within you). The bamboo that grows in the flower, only when it is in the
shade. In the same way, Hari stayed, constantly looking for Ghathai, brother. Now the song is sung, "Look for less, find less."
"Ah," he said, "what are you singing?" If you want to take medicine and the doctor gives you medicine, "Look, you take some
ginger-sugar, it will be good." So when you come home like, "I take ginger-sugar, I take ginger-sugar," what medicine is he going
to be? That is our way. That we don't do what we want to do, we talk about it. Therefore, I say that we should meditate. But how
to go? But no one says that. You will meet so many speakers that we should love, love the whole world. Hey, Can love be taught?
Can you love electricity? Love is inherent and that is how we feel. We love our children, we love our fathers, we love our mothers,
we love our wives, we love our husbands, all of a sudden we feel love. There is no love in teaching. Then even religion is not
taught. He is in us from birth, he has to know. How to go now? This is in front of everyone, how to go? How to know that
Paramatman? Say it. How to do self-realization? Many people say, “Yes, it can happen. Do this, you stand on your head, stand up
for twenty-five minutes every day, and say God's name. " Nothing will happen! That's a lie. "You wear saffron clothes and dance,

jump, he will find God!" It's so easy, So what about painting a sari for two rupees and dancing? Someone will say, “It will not
happen. You go to the temple and take the boat. ” Ah, the name is like this, a man like Tulsidas - who wrote such a big Ramayana
- used to take the name. Raghuveer himself came to him three times and they planted Tila, sandalwood, and did not recognize
him.
Your "Hare Ramawale, Hare Krishnawale" came to me from Mumbai. He said to me, "Mataji, you don't take the name of God!"
"Hey," he said, "do you know anything about naming?" Take someone's name! Tomorrow you will come to my door and say
'Mataji, Mataji,' and if you meet me on the street, will you recognize me? Do you agree with me? ” I say, come in, get to know him
first, it's going to be hard to name even once [no / is].
Then they started saying, “We have all given up, we have given up so much. By doing this, by doing that we went to the forest.
Doing something, doing something and you sit in your house, you have children, grandchildren and how do you do it? You didn't
leave anything? ”
I said, "Look, I tell you this, you have a challenge. Pick up any belongings in my house, any object, even with the dust of the feet of
the Supreme Being, even if it is with the dust particles." I'm ready. " Look around Said, "Anything, pick up what you think."
"Nothing like him," he said.
He said, "Then there is nothing like him, then you left and you caught!" "Hey, we didn't catch it, so what?"
Now tomorrow is in front of the sea. If we decide in our mind that it is in our name, we are caught, it means we are foolish or not!
And then let's say we caught it and now we're free. We don't catch it, and who cares, Melo means everything stays here, including
the fort. It doesn't matter to you. Who is holding and who is leaving? If God could be found with such stupidity, then God is also a
fool!
Ah, He is Almighty! What power he has! If a magnet with a very strong power is in a place and you don't go there and dance in
front of it with a small magnet, then jump, if not stand on your head, by doing this, if it comes to you, do it, but is it possible? Just
let go of the little power you have, just pull it off quickly. The bus is there to pull. Its power is so great that we want to draw it into
ourselves. But he wants it to happen in your will. You have to have the will. He will not force you unless you want to. That is, he
has raised man in his glory. His relationship is respectful. He has all the freedom.
Nowadays, people do a lot of hypnosis in Mumbai, that is, they do magic. And to make people dance like crazy with magic
charms on them, to jump, what, what… type! People ate thousands of rupees. And we love it, folks! People, don't want freedom,
don't want your glory and what are you! How big it is! Now Pradhan Saheb told about a beggar. Sometimes people become
beggars, they become intentional, we don't know that. Suppose there is a great queen in a birth, but she will have a lot of trouble
from her husband, from that king, a lot of trouble in the house, the burden of that queen will be very much on her. So she can say,
"Lord, make me a beggar in the next life, but don't make me a queen!" Her next birth will be that of a beggar, but on the inside, she
is a queen, in her health, she will be a queen. You may have seen many rich people are so poor, [So / so] beggar. And how rich
some of the poor are on the inside!
So he has his struggle to know the Supreme, he is making all the arrangements for you. You are born again and again, you
reduce your preferences, you do it, you bring it to that place, you see religion there. I mean, if such a person is a very devout
Brahmin [says], "And now I hate all Muslims and all Mlenchchas in my heart", thinking that if a Brahmin stood up today, you
would be surprised that in the next life he would become a "Muslim". Should be! I tell you. People who work hard here…, we had
now gone to Tehran. In Tehran, people are meditating, while Muslims are ringing bells and chanting. Here we see Brahmins in
our Mumbai, they pray there. What madness! They go to one extreme and then to another. it doesn't need to be seen, In the next
life, you will be born "Harijan"! Do you have a right to your birth? But if you hate someone, tomorrow the world will hate you. What
I say will come back to me. My "Sahaja yoga" is very easy for a person who has come out of this excess. Means "Sahaja yoga".

If I told you to remove the seed from this seed, can anyone remove it from you? You cannot germinate from a single seed, and
what a man has his mind! Hey, building a house, what's up? Dead bricks and dead house! Is there vitality in him? Can we do at
least one living thing in the world? What a man has his mind! What does he think of himself? Nothing you do. That is to say,
whatever we do, we just feel like we are doing it. We don't do anything, we do everything. It will not become one [truth / pakka]
until we realize it [until] we experience some power of it [no]. Please don't believe me like a blind person. It is impossible to get
Paramatma by superstition.
Suppose, in this room, you come from outside, it is dark. I now own this room. I know all the windows, doors, and arrangements
for this room. As soon as you come, I will say, “Look, sit here, here, Sataranji is gone for you. Here is the lamp. There's a light
switch. " You will see it slowly, you will understand, if it is, believe it, if not, don't believe it at all. So sometimes he is an atheist
rather than an atheist! That is not to say that believers are bad. My point is that a person stuck to something can hardly get into
that sea. If you want to get into the sea, you have to leave whatever is on the shore. You have to leave all the ladders to get into
this hall. Does that mean the ladders are bad? How do you get in without leaving the ladder?
Then comes the second question, “Ki Mataji, how is that possible? In the past, only one or two people had self-realization. And
now you say there are thousands, how is that possible? ” Why not? Hey, if in the past one or two trees used to have flowers, [now]
thousands of trees have blossomed, won't there be thousands of fruits? Have you never seen such a life? Something may have
increased in life. And this is going to happen in Kali Yuga only, otherwise, how will Satyayuga come? To change Kali Yuga, to
bring Satyayuga, something special, in all living beings, a mass must be done, otherwise, Satyayuga is not possible. Instead there
Now man is standing in such a place, where he is either in the pool of good, in the pool or the pool of evil, evil & good. If people
do not decide at this time that we want to bring Satya Yuga, then I do not doubt that the whole world will be destroyed! But what
is already sitting in your head should be emptied a little. Because it is like this, many people read a lot, "We saw many gurus,
sadhus came, they came." Hey, they must have come! Have they given you anything? Are you happy Have you been given peace
Have you been told to love, what is it? Love should flow from the hand, knock knock knock knock, it goes hand in hand.
These are our disciples sitting here, So I say I don't heal people because time is short, I want to make doctors. And all these
people just give it with their hands, like that, There should be no vision therapist, it should be open, What happens or not? It was
easy. But the man with the medical vision clung to something extravagant, saying how could he be pushed into the sea? Anyone
who wants to go to sea must leave the coast. I have indeed wandered on the shore till now, otherwise, I would have seen the
happiness on someone, I would have loved someone, that peace would have originated somewhere, but I have not seen it
anywhere. I have seen so many monks, hermits, and so on, not a single person has seen this thing, the thing that has come to our
disciples and will come to you. I had gone to Parva Vasai, a hundred people crossed! You will be surprised. And such an amazing
event! It's so amazing! How is it possible that people think that? But it is.
That is to say, I was born in such a state from my childhood that I had this consciousness and the transmigration consciousness
remained with me. But in this birth, here, I realized, that in this birth, as long as I don't give it to people, who are always born [with
me] and don't just give speeches. Just tell people, “You love, you become good people!” Many say that it will not work. There
have been many book writers. But what happened? Do it, do it, do it! So there has to be an arrangement where, if I bring them,
somewhere, somehow [at least] to the fifth garden and let them go, they will think that Mataji has taught us something, and
beyond that, beyond what is seen. When they see it, when they see it beyond, then they will think that it is,
Now, look at us, how few, very few young people are young. Now amid this youth, I had gone to Baroda. I put my speech at the
university. So all our people (said), "We said we won't let go, (Mrs.)." “But why, Dad? What is it? ” Getting rid of someone's corpse,
if not, condemn someone, if not, kill, remove! This is the condition of our children today, why? Because of him you. [We] have
spent so much money in the name of religion, we have run so fast, they know that this idiot [got what?] So why should we fall into
this idiot? Somehow we have to do another thing, so they have done another thing. This is the condition of our children. But this
is not the case with young children in the United States. This is what young children in America understand, That they did,

religion, etc… they didn't get anything, otherwise why are they so angry? How many defects are there in them? And what is
Dharma Dharma? So he said, "Leave (all this), we don't want a house, we don't need a door, we don't want a mother, we don't
want a father, we all live together and live as we please." We don't want money, we don't want anything, leave everything, they do
all the business, with money! So, left. But who is going to benefit? So, left. But who is going to benefit? So left. But who is going
to benefit?
Suppose we thought, we would hold on to it, or we would hold on to it. We are standing on the ground. At that time, [man] does
not want to give up anything. Wherever he stands, he stands in awe. The whole system has been beautified by the Supreme
Being within us since time immemorial. [Fall] into it. Your mother is in your womb. She is just sitting there giving birth to you. And
she is going to reincarnate you, put you in the state where you will be second. She is sitting in you. But people have. Where is
your vision How Much Money Do You Make Nowadays? No, then, stand for election, if not, then serve the people somewhere!
You can't go beyond that. But you can't go, you can't go down to Dharma even after trying.
Nowadays people, like sitting on a horse, want to save time, save time…, why save time? Hey, we want to see where [the
satisfaction is]. This is the attitude that God has given, the clock should also be said to be given by God. Everything that is
outside has come from within. And he gave the watch just so you can save time, why? Get inside! As soon as the time is empty,
the man becomes frightened. He runs away to the cinema somewhere…he can't spend his time sitting alone. For five minutes I
told him to sit alone, he can't meet himself, he runs away from there! Because he has the idea that we are very dirty. The fact is
we are so beautiful ourselves! If you tell me, 'You stay in this room for three months,' I will be happy! I will never be bothered by it.
Not because I'm beautiful, but because I'm beautiful, I can sit there and watch.
Now, in today's Sahaja yoga, you have to understand it in simple language. I mean, a lot of books have been written on Kundalini.
Among them, many people say that Kundalini deteriorates, if someone wakes up Kundalini, she will do something! He gets it, it
happens! It tells many different stories. The fact is that people who do Kundalini understand that something is a mechanical
thing, a mechanical thing. And if not, they make dirty accusations like sex. This is your "mother". Mom, everyone can forgive your
murder. If you kill her, she won't call you Br; But if you accuse her of sex, won't she get angry with you? As much as they say that
Kundalini is irritated, they make all sorts of allegations against that Kundalini, therefore! If there is a person in whom the love of
God is flowing, then it is easy for him to Just like when you water a tree, just as you water a tree, just as easily as a flower bears
fruit, so can you. But you have to give water if you pour kerosene on it! Water is life. The kerosene is dead. Kundalini cannot be
awakened by dead things. "Kundalini" means in simple words, now it's Mike, not mine, the one I'm talking about, we created it
properly before. God has created everything in such a way for man, for everyone. It doesn't matter if he is educated, uneducated,
from India, or England, or America. Just as a beautiful machine has been created, so man, created by the Supreme Spirit, has a
connection attached to it. Now, to bring this connection back to that Paramatman, such a task is 'Sahaja yoga'.
Now he has a lot of scripture. I am also writing books if anyone wants to read it. But why am I still writing a book? He wrote a
book, he sat down (with a Bible) in his hand, it is written in it, it has this mantra in it, he sat back reciting the mantra! So even
writing a book makes me feel a little stolen. The speech is the same. There are a lot of people in speech, too, who hold on to only
that which will keep them out of the way. I say, forget my speech too, forget everything - just like all the steps you took, [forgot]
and came inside - to forget everything. You don't want to say a mantra, you don't want to say, Guru, you don't want to chant, you
don't want to chant, everyone has thoughts. There is a small space between the two thoughts, from there I want to take your
attention to me. So any thought - whether it be Guru or Dharma or God's name - is the same thought for all of you. And once it
happens then the Guru makes sense, then the idol of Rama makes sense, everything makes sense. Now I am sitting on it, this
shawl also has my vibrations. These people cured many patients even by just taking photos of my feet. I mean, it makes sense. If
water washed my feet, they would cure many ailments. The real thing is! I'm not surprised, you might think. Because, if this is the
power of the Supreme Being who has designed all the creation, then what are the features in doing these small things! All
diseases can go away. But first, everyone must gain their inner strength. And should be obtained in complete freedom. And once
it happens then the Guru makes sense, then the idol of Rama makes sense, everything makes sense.
Now I am sitting on it, this shawl also has my vibrations. These people cured many patients even by just taking photos of my
feet. I mean, it makes sense. If water washed my feet, they would cure many ailments. The real thing is! I'm not surprised, you

might think. Because, if this is the power of the Supreme Being who has designed all the creation, then what are the features in
doing these small things! All diseases can go away. But first, everyone must gain their inner strength. And should be obtained in
complete freedom. And once it happens then the Guru makes sense, then the idol of Rama makes sense, everything makes
sense. Now I am sitting on it, this shawl also has my vibrations. These people cured many patients even by just taking photos of
my feet. I mean, it makes sense. If water washed my feet, they would cure many ailments. The real thing is! I'm not surprised, you
might think. Because, if this is the power of the Supreme Being who has designed all the creation, then what are the features in
doing these small things! All diseases can go away. But first, everyone must gain their inner strength. And should be obtained in
complete freedom.
These people cured many patients even by just taking photos of my feet. I mean, it makes sense. If water washed my feet, they
would cure many ailments. The real thing is! I'm not surprised, you might think. Because, if this is the power of the Supreme
Being who has designed all the creation, then what are the features in doing these small things! All diseases can go away. But
first, everyone must gain their inner strength. And should be obtained in complete freedom. These people cured many patients
even by just taking photos of my feet. I mean, it makes sense. If water washed my feet, they would cure many ailments. The real
thing is! I'm not surprised, you might think. Because, if this is the power of the Supreme Being who has designed all the creation,
then what are the features in doing these small things! All diseases can go away. But first, everyone must gain their inner
strength. And should be obtained in complete freedom.
What is Jupiter nowadays? Fifty of the footsteps are gone. Every village guru has left. The tide of America is flowing. Do they go
there and do this? Mohini Vidya (Mesmerism) (puts a weapon on you - this is a method - they seduce you by putting a weapon.
As much money as you have, it will be, it will be, you want to get rid of it all and after that, you have to do it properly! I say, why
does this work of God need money? It's a straightforward thing. Hey, this should be free. Everything important was free. The
breath we breathe tomorrow, the heart we breathe tomorrow, ask someone how it works? Ask the doctor, they [will say, it's all
automatic]. So who is that 'self'? Tell me, who is he? Who is driving it, heart, and how easy! Very easy. [Also] this must be an
important task. If it is difficult, it will not happen. You can't be too easy. You can't eat from here; Going from here to there, going
there, breaking our limbs four or five times, when we eat, we feel like we have eaten, if not, how could we have eaten so easily!
I give the example of a simple mother. I've cooked for you, okay. Are you hungry So, the plate has grown, sit down to eat? If you
are hungry, sit up straight. If not, say, “Mom, where did you go? Where did you get it How are you? ” If I give you a radio prize
tomorrow, you will immediately pick it up and see if your mother has given us a radio to listen to. Or do you just sit and watch it
all in engineering? "Don't say engineering first, we don't listen to the radio?" (Say so). Man has no idea about the things of the
world. Suppose tomorrow I say, "There's a diamond here." If such an announcement is made to Delhi, then people from Delhi will
come here by plane to see the diamond! Diamond [just take it ready] so look, then let's see! In the case of religion, one goes
backward. “How can you give so much without money? How easy is that? ” On the contrary.
I just said that as important as everything is, it should be easy. And a lot of people said to me in America, "Mataji, every man
takes one and a half to three hundred dollars from us and you don't take (one) money here, how come?" Said, "Look, you tell me
how much it costs?" I don't understand, what is the price? Do you pay the price? ” It is said that these are (all) subconscious
people. They have come here to fool you and you pay them like fools. Did you get Properly covered, it will withstand a lot of
adverse conditions. And you feel happy, wow! How we [fly/fly] for God !. Then when you go crazy, after ten years, you will come
to me [easily / back].
That is to say, all these kinds of things happen in the afterlife. As many Babaji people as there are, everyone learns the afterlife.
They do all these things by making demons place on you. All (your) money will be taken away, your children will be destroyed and
you will be made to stand on the street and tie your knots and leave for America! There are a lot of criminals (criminals, many
criminals today) who are sitting there with their hair tied up. People are now realizing that since they are aware of the art of
throwing dust, they are not aware of it! And you will be surprised that five demons and five demons have been born in this Kali
Yuga! Everyone is born from Ravana-Narkasur. And yours, showing your colors. But they will not call themselves Ravana! They
will call themselves God, God, so and so! They don't want to come to know you! There is magic in them! You may have heard
that, the illusory monster! They are all born and you are like a fool, “Ahaha! Babaji came, Babaji came and took out two hundred

rupees and gave it to us. ” Hey, brother, I gave you two hundred rupees, so who gave you something? You are a millionaire! Give
no to a poor person! Each of the rich is given a diamond necklace. What diamonds do they lack? Share with the poor?
One of our relatives came and said to me, "Babaji gave us a ring, a diamond!" They are very rich!
I said, "How much, how much do you have, a diamond (ring)?"
"It will be, it will be ten-twelve!"
He said, “So who else took this thirteenth? If you have not been happy since ten or twelve, is it coming from the thirteenth? Who
took it, brother? ”
Say, "No, no, he saw my devotion."
I said, “Hey, what is devotion? Is there a reward in the market? Be crazy, Go to the market for as much as you want! ”
(He said,) "No, I didn't pay much for such things. I gave him only five-six thousand rupees. Later it came to my mind that they
should be given money, something the ring has been given. '
He is possessed by a demon. These rings are spinning and that's where the ghost is telling everything. This is the [great]
knowledge, the knowledge of the hereafter! And all the demons have come to this Kali Yuga. And here I am alone, telling love
stories to people! And says, “Come to Sahaja yoga. Light your lamp in us, ”meaning darkness will go away. Isn't that going to kill
the darkness and scream? This darkness is going to light up. Each of you has such a terrible lamp (such a bright lamp), (which)
burned and destroyed all these. And love too! And the characteristic of love is that, like the [shield] of the sea, no matter how
much the sea comes, it grows bigger, the love grows bigger. The weapon of love is above all weapons. The whole world lost to
that weapon. And the same weapon started flowing from you, see if everyone is running away with their babies! [Everyone] must
go through this world! I would even go so far as to say that if Lord Krishna comes, "Now don't kill Kamsa, Baba, even if he dies, he
is born again and again" and even if Rama comes, even if he kills Ravana, you are killing the body, he is born again and again.
Better a poor horse than no horse at all. That is, he will become a sadhu in the next life. Such a situation has arisen.
Let's see how you get it, Dhulya! Here, I have heard a lot of goodness. Diameters but close to saying, have a place. There are
such waves in the atmosphere here, they make me feel inside, work can happen. But I say about one or two things, "Don't be
stubborn!" The boy stubbornly sat down, that the mother is very upset! Explained, no matter how much you explain, children are
stubborn! It's too late now! Take it when we come. When Ganga came to the door, you didn't take it, so when will you take it? But
if your jug is full, what will Ganga do? Even if the sun comes to your door, and if you don't open your door, it's not the sun's fault!
Afterward, a householder came and said to me, 'Mataji, look, my daughter is so sick. If you treat her well, I will accept you! ' "I
don't treat anyone well," she said. This is your idea, I'm not doing anything to anyone! I'm just standing in the middle. " I'm just
standing in the middle like he's standing in the mic and I'm talking. Now, this mike will say tomorrow, 'I'm talking!' I'm nothing, I'm
standing in the middle. If he wants to be cured, he will do it, otherwise, he will not do it! I have nothing. I have no favors and I have
nothing to give or take. I'm just standing in the middle.
Finally, tells a story, funny, of Radha and Krishna. Once, Radhe got jealous of Murali (flute) and said, “Why, why are you in
Krishna's mouth? What's so significant about a goat's head? ” So [Murali] said, “Oh crazy, my only characteristic is that I have no
characteristic at all. I am hollow [inside], I have nothing left. He plays, I just hear and see. I have witnessed it. I'm just hollow. If I
stand somewhere in the middle, won't his voice get worse? ” That's how you want to be hollow. As soon as you become hollow
you will realize how much beautiful music you have, and what beauty you have too! Happy! It is "Sahaja yoga" to just start the
flow that is coming to us.
I hope all of us, especially children, benefit from this very soon. Very children benefit so quickly because simple-minded

creatures are quick to cross. And after crossing, he stands up and tells me, "Mataji, he is going from here, he is not going from
here, he is going from here." Exactly [get up] and say, [quickly]! Begin to tell. Now Mumbai has a ten-year-old Muslim boy, Shabbir,
he is over, so he is very cool! That's right. And you might be surprised to learn that if someone has an obstacle, the right-hand
clicks. And as many Babaji disciples as there are people, in their hands in the hands of some people - you will be surprised, what
is called - blisters (blisters) come, good blisters! Large blisters appear. These are all powers and are working. If you want to be
saved from this, you must first attain enlightenment.
Nowadays, when there is a drought in Maharashtra, it is going on in the minds of the people, I know what is going on in the minds
of some people. Or in such a drought, in this state of poverty, how will it [appear / decrease]? In a sense, I say famine has come,
a little better. One day while doing the same thing, I had said to a very big Minister of Maharashtra, "You, why don't you dig a well
here?" The Minister was for wells, "Wells should be dug, how many wells are there in Punjab?" So he said, “Hey, he will need a lot
of money. It will happen, it will happen. ”Now look! So there is wealth and poverty and misery and misery A man is very rich he is
not rich at all! Our driver is to Mumbai, I call him, this king is the man and he was, he was a pre-born king. And he saw, and,
behold, the chariot driver of my chariot, He is happier than I am. ” He said to God, “Oh God, make me a charioteer in the next life!
I'm tired of kingship! ” Then he became a born driver, but he is a king in health. So what is this rich thing! If one has he becomes
rich and if one has he becomes poor. There are only so many types of wealth and poverty. The man who becomes [Saint], he
doesn't need anything, everything is at his feet. What silver, what gold, what diamond! What, yes, there are stones! [Is this rich]?
Wealth is the mind. If one has he becomes rich and if one has he becomes poor. There are only so many types of wealth and
poverty. The man who becomes [Saint], he doesn't need anything, everything is at his feet. What silver, what gold, what diamond!
What, yes, there are stones! [Is this rich]? Wealth is the mind. If one has, he becomes rich and if one has he becomes poor. There
are only so many types of wealth and poverty. The man who becomes [Saint], he doesn't need anything, everything is at his feet.
What silver, what gold, what diamond! What, yes, there are stones! [Is this rich]? Wealth is the mind.
Now my example is that our servant eats ten times as much as me. Even if I have to eat once a day, nothing happens to me. Yet
he stays hungry! One even if you feed him jellies, there is another sweet of Milk. Poor thing! And i. He needs a bed to sleep in,
neat, a fan! If you put me on the ground, I will fall asleep. I will sleep even if I put it on the road. We are Shahensha, what about
us? Hey, what's the rest of Shahenshala? Comfort is at his feet. The one who sits on comfort sits on, is the real "emperor"! [So]
poverty and wealth are [thoughts] of our heads [below]. We should [see] in our nature. A woman is very poor, but what a gift she
has! And even though a woman is so rich, she just dies for a penny. You may have had many such experiences with stingy
people. That is to say, Leave all these things (poverty and wealth) inside and meet the Supreme Being, who gives you all the
wealth from within. And all that has happened in that creation, which we call money, and such great glory is not even with his
toes or his fingers. [As] the boat turned that Lakshmi [then you] !.
Satya Yuga should come. With the advent of Satya Yuga, what is going to happen! I look forward to that era. But first I wonder if
he will come to India or America! I think people in India still want to go on many more cycles, many times! Especially, our
Mumbai! Let's see how Dhulya gets it! Is on the rise. His grace and His love are constantly flowing.
We do meditation experiments in Mumbai. If you want, you can meditate. In meditation, we just want to close our eyes, not do
anything. To do so would mean that you would be far from God! Nothing to do. I used to sit comfortably, just like I sit down to
eat, I used to sit with an easy attitude. The power that runs through me will run through you; If you are sick, you will be healed, if
you have any problem, she will let us know and, if your body is in good health and you are not clinging to something, you will
easily be thoughtless. Go beyond thoughts. It is very difficult to go beyond thoughts! That's what people say. I don't think so.
Now, if a person wants to go to Baroda from here, he will go to America, go to Japan and then reach Baroda, he will say so. But
since we know the way, it's very simple. It's easy to do, easy to do! It is very easy. You sit very easily, you will feel as if you have
become thoughtless. Once thoughtless, you want to get your hands on it. Our church will go and see if it has happened or not. If
it's okay (thoughtless), they'll tell you.
There are many churches here today that are sick. If they have small children, take them out if they are very small. Because she
will cry and so on… and others will suffer. There is nothing to worry about when the result will be in fifteen to twenty minutes. No
one has ever suffered so much, at least not yet! Then, it won't happen to you either. When thousands of people have Kundalini

(awakened) and [no matter how many] thousands of people have passed, people have introspection, then nothing will happen to
anyone. (The first experience is that you will be thoughtless).
You can know everything about science that is just discussed. That's how simple it is. After all, I had said that if it was dark in
this room and your eyes were closed and you came in from the outside, you would not want to suggest anything. Someone
holding your hand told you that there is a lamp here, sit here, etc.slowly something will start flashing. However, the whole room
will not be noticed. But suppose, if a doer is such a subject, then he can add light to the whole room so that you can see
everything. So if there is such a doer, he can open your eyes wide and you can [see] everything inside. The eyes of the people in
America are very open, in your honor. Because everything happened to them, now they have money, they have a house, they have
a door.
See how fun this mind is too, it is your vehicle and it is also your guru! You say I want to buy a watch now, for that watch that will
drive you crazy! As soon as he took the watch, he said, "It's still not fun!" Then run to something else, then run to a third! He would
go with us wherever our mind goes. But every time, happiness does not come to him. Each time, he says, “I'm not happy. I'm not
happy. I don't have a break. ” So you have an idea to find something else, and what do you want to find it? So, this mind is running
from here to there just like you. But if you oppress him, if he is oppressed, this mind will not help in the end. So, these types of
minds are different! I see meditation even when you are sitting, That this mind stands somewhere in the middle and tells you
something and sees you. The horse sees how far the owners can go! If the owner says to the horse, "Hey, look," he befriends him,
"Look, I want to go somewhere," and the horse is ready to say, "Well, let's go where you want to go." But friendship should be
made with the horse. Psychologists also say that one should befriend a horse. But where to go? How to go Nobody knows this!
No one knows how to get there. It happens automatically, it accumulates automatically, no one knows. But you have to be
friends with the horse. Psychologists also say that one should befriend a horse. But where to go? How to go Nobody knows this!
No one knows how to get there. It happens automatically, it accumulates automatically, no one knows. But you have to be
friends with the horse. Psychologists also say that one should befriend a horse. But where to go? How to go Nobody knows this!
No one knows how to get there. It happens automatically, it accumulates automatically, no one knows.
Looking at the other side of science, look at it physically, in science, people will ask where is this, Kundalini, etc.? So, when the
baby is two months old in the mother's womb, this life force enters the soul. This is where it enters. Heading down (inside) from
the palate of the head, down through the middle of the brain, through the vertebral cord - the so-called spinal cord - and down to
the triangular part (bone). When this Kundalini power goes, it stops occasionally, it causes chakras. And those chakras live
inside as centers and outside they are called by doctors as plexuses, i.e. parasympathetic nervous system. These people
operate on this parasympathetic nervous system, Called the autonomous nervous system. I asked them, 'Who is this self? Who
is this auto? Who runs this heart? ' So the doctors don't answer it.
When I met many neurologists in the United States, they told me, “We can't cure cancer for so long, how to stimulate this
parasympathetic nervous system. How do we do that? It goes on automatically. ” When I showed them - practically - they were
amazed at how you operate a parasympathetic nervous system! There are one or two types outside of its identity. One of them is
that the eyes dilate, the eyes get bigger. You see the eyes of all your realized people, their bubbles have grown black. Now think,
what greater miracle could there be in the world! [Moving it up / moving hands] Taking out two hundred-three hundred rupees is
not a miracle, taking out thumbs, etc. is not a miracle. This is a ghost case!
Once, a very funny thing happened. That is, the bridegroom came to a Brahmin. And UP knows how wide it is! As soon as he
came, he said, "Then the wedding came. Some people were naughty at the wedding." Now it is not an easy thing to do Dahivade
and Brahmins in UP do not do Dahivade in winter. So there was a Babaji, he was told that he used to bring such things. He was
told, "Take as much money as you want, but bring us Dahiwade." So Babaji messed up! He said, “Look, I order Dahiwade, but I will
not stay here. I'll take the money and walk with you. ” "Okay," he said, "you take the money and go." They paid him and Babaji
ordered Dahivade. The room was closed, there were two days inside. Everyone ate Dahiwade well and passed Babaji! Take the
money and pass it on! The next morning some demands from Mangwada came - we have Vajantri etc.… they are there as well and they came, then they take out Ushte(food eaten by someone), etc. So they said, “Who brought this kullad from here?
Dahiwade was done there, who brought it here? ” All the Brahmins got angry. Rusli all night. Why did you feed us [Dahiwade in

Mangwada]? Now, to do this work. That is, the demons that are subtle (do such things), they subtle their subtlety on any heavy
object and bring it [in front] and you don't see it, as long as there is mesmerism. This is ghosting! But what do they do? Feeding
you today, [tomorrow they sit on it too!]. Hey, we're the ones, now look, if you give someone a couple of bucks, you'll remember
for a lifetime, "Hey, they came that day, So I gave them two pennies, and they are not at all grateful to me. ” So what ghosts are
they going to forget, thank them! If they have done you any favors, suppose a man is healed.
In England, there was a man, Dr. Lang, who died. And his ghost went and sat on a soldier. And he told the soldier to go to my son.
He lives here, lives there, and go and tell him, "Because I am his father." The boy was amazed when the soldier went there! The
boy said, "Well, tell me a few signs." He said with the right sign, "There are such signs, there are such signs, this is, that is,
everything!" Recognizing the boy, he said, "Well, what do you do now?" He (the ghost) said, "You open my clinic and tell everyone
that even if we have a letter from someone who has an illness, we will come there and perform the surgery." We will heal you. ”
And this [clinic/ghost] case started. Many friends of that doctor, Many doctors were also demons and they all started working
together. But when he does something, he will thank you for it. That means ten more of their demons came into your house!
Then you say to Mataji, "Mataji, what is this [crime/trouble]." There are so many types it's hard to say. Some people may cast
spells on you just by talking. Given the speech, people start [swinging], dancing [swinging]. Begin to praise them. And they want
people like that, to make money! To gain power! Given the speech, people start [swinging], dancing [swinging]. Begin to praise
them. And they want people like that, to make money! To gain power! Given the speech, people start [swinging], dancing
[swinging]. Begin to praise them. And they want people like that, to make money! To gain power!
So, classically, physically as much as we have plexuses, we have chakras. Now, these chakras written by sages many years ago
and look at them, are very similar! Now, look at the Mooladhara Chakra. The Mooladhara Chakra is called Pelvic Plexus in
English, if there are any doctors here, they will know what I am saying. Pelvic plexuses have four suplexes. The Mooladhara
Chakra has only four, Chaturdalam, four, and four petals of that lotus. Pelvic plexus When a person is in a very normal position,
only his currents are visible. But a man who is fully illuminated, his pelvic plexus looks exactly like four lotus petals and round in
the middle. And you went to see in that sphere - I mean you can't see it right now but one tells a story like ours - if you look at [it]
inside, a point revolves around that sphere and you see in that point, you wonder, Ganesha! Shri Ganesh, this is not something we
have done. We didn't do anything, everything came from within. Shri Ganesh appears here, clear. So before Shri Ganesh appears,
his proboscis is visible and many seers have understood him as Kundalini, which is a big mistake! So sex, which is a part of the
pelvic plexus, is a hoax, with the Kundalini sitting there. And the scandal has become so big that your mother (Kundalini) herself,
who has nothing to do with sex, sits down and accuses her of having sex! And when it boils over and bursts on you like its big fire
[bombs] exploding, you write books that don't touch Kundalini, it chews on you, it will chew! Because she is your real mother and
what a dirty accusation you make against her!
Well now look how beautiful this Shri Ganesha's [work] is there. Ganesh! Shri Ganesha, this is a perpetual child, an eternal child.
So, what does our unconscious mind tell us, or what does the Lord who is sitting inside us tell us? That when you descend into
your spirituality, in spirituality you feel like a child in terms of sex. Your mother will have the vision of a small child, only when you
are like a small child will your mother meet you, otherwise, she will not meet! People who have such pride, “What a scholar we
are! We have read this book, we have read that book…, they never want to be realized! Mother, that's right, Ramdas Swami has
said, "Mother" has grown up a bit, so let's see what you do! But when the baby is small, how does the mother give him milk on
time and take care of him? If you become like a small child - that what you have read is useless, what we have learned is useless,
we are children - that mother understands, that your realization will happen. It doesn't happen to many, so people say, "Mataji,
how come you want it to happen!" We don't even want to! This is surprising. We don't want to make you realized, we don't want to
do that, I mean we don't have any desire, we don't want to! But he wants to do it, so he comes from "me" and does it from me, it
seems that I am in front of you. His work is going on inside. He does not (cross) you, I can tell him the reason. And the reason for
that is that the childhood condition that has come in you if you want to understand yourself in a polite and big way, look, there is
no realization! Where are you? Who are you before God? He is not a beggar and neither is Seth. He has a little boy who is not a
beggar. You ask a child, well, it's straightforward.
There was a boy next to us. He began to speak very quickly. People say that a child [in reality] belongs to God! So I asked him,
“Munna (Son), who are you? Are you Hindustani? ”

He said, "No."
"Are you Japanese?"
"No."
"Are you a Hindu?"
"No."
"Are you a Muslim?"
"No." Even [scared],
So I said, "Who are you, tell me?"
(He said), “Mom, you forgot. I am your little one. ”
How true! The only truth is, "Mother, I am your child." There is no other truth than this, all these false labels became Hindustani
because they were born in India today, they became Pakistani because they were born in Pakistan tomorrow. What was written
on your head when you were born? Who created Hindustan? Made by humans. Even that God must be wondering, "Oh, Dad, I
never made this, it happened [somewhere / how]!" Hey, he filled in the picture, he created the universe. We made him a
Hindustan, we made him an American, we made him do this, he did that , what is the benefit? Quarreling and arguing over it;
We are Brahmins, we are Hindus, we are Muslims, we are so-and-so, who are you? No one, you. You are, [children] are all one
from here to there. Now we also have a few wives, these men, and we wives,
Once, Meera had gone to Vrindavan. There, Tulsidasji became a big celibate - some would say he was not realized, some would
say no - and Mirabai sent a message saying, "I want to see you." He said, "I am a child celibate," which means it is a lie. I mean,
women are scared! So, Mirabai sent a reply to him, "I did not think that there would be any man living in this Vrindavan without
my Krishna. All my children live here. ” The man was embarrassed and then said, "Mom, forgive me." This is the difference in our
vision. This is all a difference in our vision. The woman who gave birth to the whole world has a son. I have children. The eldest
son was 92 years old. Was, I mean, it's gone now. [All these] children, whether they were reborn or not. So if there is no sin in our
attitude, then we are all children, that is [attitude].
But to the woman, the woman must be; A man should be a man. It's not that women want to be men and men want to be women!
This is not the way our Sahaja yoga, which is a church, wants to run like men, women, and women. In Sahaja yoga, men should
be men, strong and women should be gentle, like women. Women in America said to me, “Wow! Wow! Wow! You men rule over
us! ” "Oh," she said, "what a kingdom they will rule! We are queens! ” How so This [wife] is in the house, carrying the burden of
everyone. How to pick up? [What?]. The woman who has the power [can only lift] the burden. If it is quiet, then what happened is
the same.
Take the example of Sita. Rama told Sita, "You go to the forest." Now Sita would have been modern, she would have sued, [four /
ten] married in front of people and brought me and now you tell me to go to the forest. This is unfair and I'm going to have kids
now, so I would have filed a double lawsuit. And if two children had been born, two more would have been filed. This is the work
of modern people! But look at Sita's work, (she) left quietly (in the forest). If removed, it does not matter. All the stigma remained.
No matter, no matter how insulting it is, I agree. Children were born, raised. She did not vent her anger on her children. We have
wives who get angry at their husbands and children. What a wife! They are men. It is the custom of men, not women, to vent their
anger on him. Wives are those women who swallow anger and give happiness! That woman! That is to say, "Yatra naryastu

pujyante tatra ramante devata:" All the women who are revered [in life] and the women who shower happiness! Don't compete
with men. And men should not act like the washerman who removed Sita. Sita left her and stayed in the forest. Just like her
beauty! [Who will touch her]? Who will touch her chastity? Such a big Ravana but he did not run in front of her! But she remained
in the forest. You may not know for so many days that Sita, when she got back, Rama called her, called her, at that time she said,
"Done, look at your sacrifice and my sacrifice!" And she gave up. Gone. She fell to the ground, saying nothing. No one slandered
Rama, what happened! She was absorbed in our earth. Finally, Rama is said that he brought his life to end, on the river Saryu.,
Sita. This became the custom of men. Men, men should stay. Wives, wives should stay. He has all the beauty. How beautiful do
women look? It will be a little late for them, it will be almost, they don't want to walk so well! They don't want to walk so much
[intellectually], they have, that is, they have to behave [insignificantly]. Suppose they feel bad about a man, that he is bad, that is,
he is bad. Men don't understand, "But how do you say that?" "But it felt inside. It's bad, it's bad." That's right, they're right, and men
are right. That he is evil means that he is evil. Men don't understand, "But how do you say that?" "But it felt inside. It's bad, it's
bad." That's right, they're right, and men are right. That he is evil means that he is evil. Men don't understand, "But how do you say
that?" "But it felt inside. It's bad, it's bad." That's right, they're right, and men are right.
Here are some examples of wives. Take Noor Jahan as an example. What a woman she was! Noor Jahan was in love with Salim
and she had decided to marry him. But the king, his father - Akbar - arranged her marriage to another man. So she left, in Bengal,
near Calcutta, where she stayed. Then she served him wholeheartedly. Stayed there with full dignity. But when this Salim became
king, [Jahangir], her husband was killed during his reign. She thought he had killed her! Now only God knows the truth! But look at
her behavior! Now she was a Muslim! But look at her behavior, no less than Sita! So it went to her and fell at her feet; But she
said, "I will not come." When she was arrested, she said, “Be careful! If you touch me, stay away. ” He did not dare. He then went
and arrested her and she went and lived in a small house on one side. Then he fell ill in her bereavement. Then his mother was
very kind, and she went and said to him, "Woman, I serve you." She didn't know it, because it was his mother. She served him very
well. So she said, Ask what you want. Today I am in good health. I will give you whatever you ask for. ” She said, "What do you
want?" So say, "Yes, I will give if I have it!" She said, "All I want is for you to marry my son." She said, "Yes, it does." Such a big
emperor, not ready to marry him! But ready to marry her son, this poor lady, this poor lady had become or was ready to get
married. She soon found out that he was the emperor and married her. Look at this! What about women, what about each
country! What an exemplary or what a unique thing these women are! The whole creation has stopped at the asthma of these
women. Can men oppress anyone? No matter how much she does, what will happen to her in the face of this woman's courage
and still she will continue to be showered with love, the same real woman! So, in Dharma, people who have come in the form of a
woman, and a man who has come in the form of a man, can come into our religion. But those who are half-people, [can dance -] Nowadays, you may have heard, they dance [naked], etc. This half-people are known as they become [naked] immediately!
People can come into our religion who have come in the form of a woman, and a man who has come in the form of a man. But
those who are half-people, [can dance -]
So, in Dharma, what man should be like, and also from a scientific point of view, what I am saying is all in our body. All the
plexuses are in your body. So you have accepted it with wisdom. Now I'm trying to make you understand. No matter how much I
tell you that honey tastes like this, honey is obtained like this, where is it brought from, it happens, it contains what it contains
and it benefits the body like this. No matter how much you [tell] it, my speech is in vain unless you [experience] it, see the effect
on yourself! As evidence, I can say that in science, what we call the parasympathetic nervous system, [I / He] is what I call
Kundalini, I am the one who awakens, she [I] controls. From religion, the description of the whole Kundalini, It's rising, lifting, etc.,
etc.… and the different, different pleasures that come from it, and the different, different shapes that come out of it, and the
benefits that come from it. What happens between us, what is the difference between us, etc., etc.… Critical of all [things], I am
going to write a book. But even after reading so many books, it will not be fun to get "him". So get it first. Those who get want to
get more, they will not get it without feeling it. In the homes of many rich people [there is a situation], whether someone is dead
or not! In such a rich house, money is all in the house; But father, father! Looks like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh,
what love is [share,] don't feel like money, what do you feel about money! Share love. Different happiness and the different,
different shapes that come out of it and the benefits that come from it. What happens between us, what is the difference
between us, etc., etc.Critical of all [things], I am going to write a book. But even after reading so many books, it will not be fun to
get "him". So get it first. Those who get want to get more, they will not get it without feeling it. In the homes of many rich people
[there is a situation], whether someone is dead or not! In such a rich house, money is all in the house; But father, father! Looks

like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh, what love is [share,] don't feel like money, what do you feel about money! Share
love. Different happiness and the different, different shapes that come out of it and the benefits that come from it. What
happens between us, what is the difference between us, etc., Critical of all [things], I am going to write a book. But even after
reading so many books, it will not be fun to get "him". So get it first. Those who get want to get more, they will not get it without
feeling it. In the homes of many rich people [there is a situation], whether someone is dead or not! In such a rich house, money is
all in the house; But father, father! Looks like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh, what love is [share,] don't feel like
money, what do you feel about money! Share love. Etc.… Critical of all [things], I am only going to write a book. But even after
reading so many books, it will not be fun to get "him". So get it first. Those who get want to get more, they will not get it without
feeling it. In the homes of many rich people [there is a situation], whether someone is dead or not! In such a rich house, money is
all in the house; But father, father! Looks like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh, what love is [share,] don't feel like
money, what do you feel about money! Share love. Etc.… Critical of all [things], I am only going to write a book. But even after
reading so many books, it will not be fun to get "him". So get it first. Those who get want to get more, they will not get it without
feeling it. In the homes of many rich people [there is a situation], whether someone is dead or not! In such a rich house, money is
all in the house; But father, father! Looks like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh, what love is [share,] don't feel like
money, what do you feel about money! Share love. Whether someone has mailed or not! In such a rich house, money is all in the
house; But father, father! Looks like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh, what love is [share,] don't feel like money, what
do you feel about money! Share love. Whether someone has mailed or not! In such a rich house, money is all in the house; But
father, father! Looks like you came to the cemetery! Should feel. Oh, what love is [share,] don't feel like money, what do you feel
about money! Share love.
Look at how beautiful, you have the form of Lakshmi. To Lakshmi, the whole body is given the form of a woman, that is, she must
be the form of a mother. The man who has Lakshmi should have the form of a mother. How much guilt your mother takes in your
stomach! If a man hits his servant as Lakshmi, then he is not Lakshmi (husband), he is a moneylender! Then she has two lotuses
in her hand. What do lotuses mean? So [she] should be beautiful, like a lotus [in her smile], on her face, in her demeanor, in her
speech, in everything, she should be beautiful. A lot of swear words are coming out of his mouth and he says Lakshmipati(
Owner of Wealth and money)! What Lakshmipati! Lakshmipati should be [like a lotus]. And a house like a lotus or its abode is
very beautiful and comfortable in it, like a beetle going inside and sleeping comfortably if anyone comes to [his] door, he should
get comfort. No no, As soon as Lakshmipati starts barking with the four dogs in the house, will not be seen.
The identity of Lakshmipati has been given a lot more, it is one hand and the other hand is that of Lakshmi. This hand means you
have shelter. Someone went to your shelter and if you can't shelter him, then what kind of Lakshmipati are you? There is no
Lakshmipati in giving money to one's children! In animals, too, the condition disappears, after a few days. But our human beings
have a lower status than animals. Until he got old, he used to save money for the boy like a miser, and when the boy grew up, he
used to squander all that old man's money. But [some] said, "Oh, give a poor man two bucks!" Dad! "Those who ask for it come
every day (those who ask for it come every day)!" Your son, your daughter, here too, you see, in meditation, your children will
come forward for the first time, "Take-take, take-take." Hey, all the kids are yours. Your son should be fine, your daughter should
be fine. You, you, yours, yours…., Hey, in the end, the same kids bother you! I will give because this love has no meaning. This is
what limited love is, this is the death of love! His power going into a tree, if water gets on him and gets stuck in a flower, the
whole tree will die and that flower will die too! What good is such love? If it is not in the hands of such Lakshmipati, it is an arrow
(love), if it is not, then it is also not Lakshmipati. Thus in the past. Lakshmipati's wife herself [Natun] is sitting and a woman next
to her, who does not even have a piece of cloth on her body, [her body/mind] will not have grief. [Looking at the other's plight] The
heart that has not passed her is a heart or a stone! After all, those same kids are bothering you! I will give because this love has
no meaning. This is what limited love is, this is the death of love! His power going into a tree, if water gets on him and gets stuck
in a flower, the whole tree will die and that flower will die too! What good is such love? If it is not in the hands of such
Lakshmipati, it is an arrow (love), if it is not, then it is also not Lakshmipati. Thus in the past. Lakshmipati's wife herself [Natun] is
sitting and a woman next to her, who does not even have a piece of cloth on her body, [her body/mind] will not have grief.
[Looking at the other's plight] The heart that has not passed her is a heart or a stone! After all, those same kids are bothering you!
I will give because this love has no meaning. This is what limited love is, this is the death of love! His power going into a tree, if
water gets on him and gets stuck in a flower, the whole tree will die and that flower will die too! What good is such love? If it is
not in the hands of such Lakshmipati, it is an arrow (love), if it is not, then it is also not Lakshmipati. Thus in the past.

Lakshmipati's wife herself [Natun] is sitting and a woman next to her, who does not even have a piece of cloth on her body, [her
body/mind] will not have grief. [Looking at the other's plight] The heart that has not passed her is a heart or a stone! If water gets
on it and gets stuck in a flower, the whole tree will die and that flower will die too! What good is such love? If it is not in the hands
of such Lakshmipati, it is an arrow (love), if it is not, then it is also not Lakshmipati. Thus in the past. Lakshmipati's wife herself
[Natun] is sitting and a woman next to her, who does not even have a piece of cloth on her body, [her body/mind] will not have
grief. [Looking at the other's plight] The heart that has not passed her is a heart or a stone! If water gets on it and gets stuck in a
flower, the whole tree will die and that flower will die too! What good is such love? If it is not in the hands of such Lakshmipati, it
is an arrow (love), if it is not, then it is also not Lakshmipati. Thus in the past. Lakshmipati's wife herself [Natun] is just sitting and
a woman next to her, who doesn't even have a piece of cloth on her body, [her body/mind] will not have grief. [Looking at the
other's plight] The heart that has not passed her is a heart or a stone! Whoever does not have a cloth on his body, his [body/mind]
will not have grief. [Looking at the other's plight] The heart that has not passed her is a heart or a stone! Whoever does not have a
cloth on his body, his [body/mind] will not have grief. [Looking at the other's plight] The heart that has not passed her is a heart or
a stone!
You do not know that I do all this work on your heart. Just does it on the heartbeat, the whole game of the heart cycle. You have
seen how the Kundalini moves on my hand! It's all about love. All creation is done by the Supreme Being in pure love, we call it
creative power, it is all His loving power. Just love, love, love! Write on it three times. And the man who can't be loved, the stone
man has no work here. A person who does not have love, who cannot open his heart and take everyone with his heart, will not get
this (this) religion. Some, some here [sticks] and threats are going to get God? Or if you give a hundred rupees to a Pandit, he will
get God, but he will not get God here. God is hungry for love! What, even that God is hungry for love !. I mean, what a great thing,
Hey! And once you start drowning in this ocean of love, who else? With this hand, serve this hand and say, "Hey, how much did I
serve you?" So you are all in my body. When only one force starts flowing from inside you, just like only one force starts flowing
from this body, if this finger touches, then this finger comes to him quickly. Also, now that you see the people who have crossed,
they immediately come running to see you. The congregation, at your own expense, these have come to you. They don't want any
money from you. They have come here for you at all costs, why? To save you from that ocean! Because the inner love is the flow!
For this love, I, too, have come running to you. If this love is not in me, then I have so much wealth, leave outside, inside, I don't
need anything. But compassion! In compassion, compassion [pulls] so much from within, that even inner happiness feels
useless! Janmajanmantari is [born / gathered]! But in this birth, there is no way without giving. Night and day do one for you. You
have to help me a little bit.

1973-0101, Public Program
View online.
1 January 1973
Public Program
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - VERIFIED
Shri Mataji: Children do not look at the clock or understand time and do not get upset about time schedules. My desire is that
you please remove your watches and ignore the time. Relax, sit comfortably, and listen to your mother. Don’t carry the weight or
heaviness in your head. Sit in front of your mother as a child would. Just like a child rests their head on the lap of their mother,
forget about work, office, and business. Please relax in front of your mother.
There were some uneducated villagers traveling by train for the first time. They put all their baggage on their heads, and when
someone asked why, they said, "We are making the train carry less weight." But the truth is, the train was carrying all of their
baggage. There's no point in carrying weight on your head. Similarly, you think you're carrying the weight of the world, but in
reality, it is God almighty that is carrying the weight, not you.
Suppose this microphone thinks it is doing everything when in reality it is just one instrument used to project my talk. We are just
the toys of the Paramatma (God). When you realize this, you understand that life is like a drama. It’s just like watching a play
about the great King Shivaji of Maharashtra. During the play, it seems like we are fighting a war with swords, but when the play
ends, we realize it was all just a performance. In the same way, God almighty is doing everything, and we are just part of this
life’s drama. It’s all an illusion—once we have realization, we see it for what it is. This is called the Maya (illusion) and Leela
(divine play) of God.
There is a difference between children and us. Children understand that it’s just play, but we mistake it for reality. We need peace
of mind (Man Shanti). Inside us, we have the power of Paramatma (God), which is the greatest power of love. It is this love that
makes our hearts beat and keeps the world running, yet some people are afraid of it. We often want to understand it, rather than
just feel it. But this is the absolute truth. God’s love is the reason this power was created, and it exists in all human beings.
Now, I will explain this absolute truth very clearly. I have a blackboard here to help explain, so please imagine you are in school,
and I, your mother, am going to teach you. Listen carefully, and don’t overthink it.
For example, this microphone works now, but there is a lot of technology and electronics behind it, amplifying the sound through
complex circuitry. We don’t always think about this—our only concern is how the sound is amplified. Similarly, God’s power and
how He created human beings and how it works are very complex, but I will explain it in a simple and easy way. Please listen
carefully, as Sahaja Yoga is very simple and easy.
Some people (Buddhi-wadi) however, judge God based on their intellect.
When a child is in the womb of the mother, approximately 2 to 3 months into gestation, at this time, the power of God, enters the
child through the developing brain passing down the spine to the sacrum bone. This power sits at the base of the spine and
creates the three main nadis (Ida, Pingala and Sushumna). During this phase, the mind, intellect, ego, and attention are not
active.
There are two types of shakti (power): jada shakti (which is a power without consciousness or physical form) and chaitanya
shakti (the conscious power, which is the pure love of God). The rays of chaitanya shakti, the power of God’s love, activate jada
shakti, and this activation is what causes the human body to function.

In the human body, the mind, intellect and heart are activated by the Chaitanya to work together. The divine power of love, which
we call chaitanya shakti, functions like a light that enters the brain. The brain is like a prism. When the light passes through a
prism, it refracts and splits into seven colours. Similarly, there are four main light rays or powers that flow through the nervous
system in the body. However, today I will focus on three of these main powers, as the fourth is less important.
The first power is the channel that travels through the central nervous system in the spine, from the sacrum bone at the base of
the spine. This bone houses an energy known as kundalini.
You might wonder why this is not understood by physicians or doctors. I have studied medicine, and if you ask most doctors
about the parasympathetic system, they will often say they are unfamiliar with it. This is called A sushumna—the central channel
of energy that mirrors the parasympathetic system. Some people refer to it as the autonomic nervous system, which controls
functions like heartbeat and breathing. Doctors often say they cannot control or interact with this system.
The Asushumna regulates the heart rate, breathing, and digestion. For example, if a person suffers from constipation, it could
turn into diarrhoea as part of a self-correcting process. People who have awakened this energy, or balanced it, often display
signs such as dilated pupils, indicating that their parasympathetic system is activated.
Now, in the body, there are two other channels called the sympathetic nervous system, often studied by doctors. However, only
those who have reached a state of realization (called drushta) can balance these internal systems. There are centres of energy
located in the spine that have connections in our hands and head.
There are three primary channels: the central channel which is the parasympathetic nervous system, or sushumna nadi; the Bida
nadi or chandra nadi (moon channel), which corresponds to the left sympathetic nervous system; and the Cpingala nadi or surya
nadi (sun channel), corresponding to the right sympathetic nervous system. Some people know these as Yin and Yang.
In medical terms, the 4Anahata chakra (heart chakra) is associated with the cardiac plexus. There is also a small void below it
that doctors recognize. When these two channels (BIda and CPingala) are active, energy flows between them, particularly
between the second chakra (swadhisthana) and the fourth chakra (4 Anahata). There is another important energy center in this
area called the 3manipura chakra or nabhi chakra, which is linked to the navel.
When the umbilical cord is cut, it severs the connection to the Manipura chakra, and the stomach becomes hollow, which is
known as the 3a Bhavasagara chakra.
Now, when the Ida and Pingala channels are activated, a person’s energy can shift. If a person is too work-oriented then the right
side becomes over active and the left side becomes depleted of energy. Now if I have pain in one hand, I may use the other hand
to alleviate the pain with massage. If the autonomic nervous system is activated, the yogi can fix such imbalance instantly, much
like healing.
These powers work throughout the body to correct imbalances. The power of the right side, called Ckriya shakti, is responsible
for action and functionality. However, if this power becomes imbalanced or damaged, it can lead to issues like cancer. For
instance, if a person consumes too many chilies or spicy foods, it can create a balloon-like growth in the stomach due to this
imbalance, which doctors may call cancer.
Cancer is becoming more prevalent worldwide, and I believe the cure lies in Sahaja Yoga meditation. We have successfully
treated many patients, but doctors are still sceptical. One day, perhaps in 10 years, when Sahaja Yoga is recognized in the West
especially in America (USA), they will acknowledge its potential to cure cancer. Our goal is not just to cure cancer, but to help
people achieve health and spiritual upliftment.
Only cancer can be cured by Sahaja Yoga. People keep asking more and more to cure cancer as a test, and we are tired of curing

it. Doctors take money for it, but doctors should study this method, which is free, and understand its deep meaning. They
shouldn't just take money. If they understood it and started curing cancer, we could shift our attention to something else that is
important. People always say, "You are curing cancer," but what we are doing is not just curing cancer. We are using the middle
channel power through which God's love flows.
Regarding the left side, there is dormant energy. Doctors say that this power is not operating, but that's not true. God has placed
everything in our bodies to work. This side keeps a record of things that are "dead” or of the past. Psychologists are attempting
to study this but doctors don't fully understand psychology, and psychologists don't fully understand doctors. Both sciences are
valid. When these two channels are activated, it's like filling a car with petrol. Eventually, these two channels form a balloon near
the crown chakra (7 Brahmarandra), representing the ego and superego. Before this, the power of God's love was active, but
these two balloons—ego and superego—close off the channel like a lid.
At this point, we start saying "I am," but in reality, we are not, because the connection with the power of God's love is closed off.
We think we are doing everything ourselves, but it's actually God who does everything; we are not doing anything.
"I want to do something" is not the true path. We need to get self-realization first, and then the reconnection happens. Only then
is the "machine" ready to start a new life. Once the dormant Kundalini power is awakened and you achieve self-realization, you
will understand everything from within and feel its effects. When the Kundalini rises to the head
(7 Brahmarandra), you will gain inside-out knowledge of how the power of God's love works miraculously.
However, this is not possible automatically. People read thousands of books about Kundalini awakening, and some even go mad
from it. The fear is real for many. To awaken it properly, we need jagruti(awakening by an authorized guru or master). But I have
not seen anyone properly awaken Kundalini now days, though we know that it was done in the past.
As a child, I often wondered how to fill the gap or void in the stomach and get the Kundalini to pass through the void chakra
(energy centre). I don’t think many children have such questions. Now, this middle channel is crucial, and this is where the
Kundalini energy must flow. But once awakened, this power must be used which is why the left and right channels need to be
activated.
The left and cright channels, like the fuel in a car, use up the power, and then it’s "spent." The main question is: once Kundalini is
awakened, how do we fill the big void gap and pass the energy further? In the past, people tried to do this, but when the energy
reaches the 2Swadhishthana chakra, it either goes to the left or the right. If it goes to the left, the person may act mad or behave
erratically. If it goes to the right, the person becomes overly religious or too "dharmic." But this power must travel through the
central channel.
Paramatman (God Almighty) is not in anyone's control. Some people may say, "Get to Paramatman by any means," but that’s not
possible. This is all an automatic process. For example, if I plant a seed in the ground, it doesn't matter what I do—whether I
dance, pray, or put sand on my head—the seed will sprout naturally when it is time. It will happen automatically and grow into a
tree. All important work happens automatically, just like breathing—it happens without our control. Nowadays, people treat
breathing exercises like they have control over it, but it happens naturally.
All bodily functions are automatic. If we say we are doing them, we are moving toward the right side, the active ego. For example,
some people go to temples and build up their ego. They should be at peace inside, and all their illusions should disappear.
Instead, today's younger generations seem angry and think there is nothing in it. There's nothing wrong with seeking the divine,
but too much ego or false pride leads us away from Paramatman (God Almighty).
Some people think they can become greedy or "haughty" and gain God's love or power, but this is not possible.
The left side is related to the collective subconscious. For example, a man may sing bhajans (worship songs) with cymbals, and

his garland may end up on the idol in a temple. But God doesn’t do this; He doesn’t have time for it. How does the garland get
from the man to the idol, or vice versa? It's not God's doing—it happens because the spirit of a saintly person, who is no longer
alive, does such work.
I didn’t intend to speak about this, but someone mentioned "Bhanamati" (a form of black magic), where objects like clothes,
cups, and dishes fly around the house. God does not perform such tasks; these are the workings of spirits or ghosts (bhoots).
Not all spirits are bad, though; some are good, and some may be the spirits of saints, like Ramakrishna Paramhansa, who was a
realized soul.
A realized soul does not possess anyone. They respect other people's freedom. Some people perform puja to God, and in these
cases, the spirit of a saintly person may come and help.
There was a doctor named Dr. Lang, who performed a famous international surgery known as Lang's surgery. After he passed
away, he thought he hadn’t done enough work. One day, a soldier went to war and got scared, but Mr. Lang's spirit possessed his
body and told him to go to London and inform his brother and son about this. The soldier did so, and the family believed him
because he knew all the details of their lives, even their little secrets. They were surprised and eventually accepted him and kept
him as a doctor. After that, a number of doctors in that surgery began to be possessed by spirits and started curing patients at
that clinic.
The procedure was simple: anyone could send a letter to Dr. Lang's surgery describing their health problems. After receiving the
letter, they would schedule a time, and then the photo of Dr. Lang would be placed in front of them. After looking at it for a long
time and concentrating (a form of Trataka), this activated the 6Agnya chakra. Then the person would begin to sweat, and their
disease would be cured. This is how the entity, or ghost, enters the body from either the 6Agnya chakra or the 3Nabhi chakra.
If you bring these people to me afterward for realization and freedom, it’s not possible because they are too possessed. So, it’s
impossible to introduce them to Paramatmas-God Almighty’s positive power. For such dangerous things, it's not good. For
example, if due to disease, the body dies, but in the next life, this person may still achieve self-realization. However once these
kinds of ghosts (bhoots) enter the body, it becomes impossible to clear them, and the path to God Almighty's love is not
possible.
So, these Babajis (false gurus) in the market engage in this kind of business in Kaliyuga. They first pull out the spirit of the
person, make two parts, and then the body falls into a state like a coma. Then, probably, the son of that person goes to these
Babajis (false gurus) and asks them to cure his father. They ask for a huge amount of money. No one is able to kill anyone, but
they create an illusion to take money and control. These things are called Smashan Vidya or Pret Vidya (knowledge of the dead
from the cemetery). These kinds of practices have increased in Kaliyuga. ( In Hindu cosmology, Kali Yuga signifies the fourth
and current age of the world, characterized by conflict, sin, and a decline in dharma and righteousness)
One question you must ask is, "What does God care about? What is important for God?” He is not interested in this. It doesn’t
matter if you’re dead or alive. God could create another thousand lives.
What does God Almighty want?
When you get the new light of the lamp inside yourself and grow in life with positive power that is the desire of God Almighty.
God is not interested in you as an individual; He could create thousands of lives just like yours. Does He care about fixing your
body? He could create thousands of bodies like yours. A person who is interested in Paramatman (God Almighty) must be
focused on God and nothing else. The central channel is important. If you go down the left channel, you’re heading toward the
past life (Paraloka vidya ). If you go down the right side, it leads to becoming a workaholic, diseases like cancer, or an egoistic
mindset.
If you read about Kundalini awakening, in the past, it was said that a person would experience fits or fainting, and some books

mention getting big blisters on the head, like burns. I have seen it myself. I’ve witnessed in meditation that one person even
jumped like a frog. When I asked, they said their Guru/Master gave them realization, and that’s why it happened. This seems
nonsensical—like mocking God. Is God a donkey, asking you to jump like a frog?
Such things don’t happen here. We have awakened the Kundalini of thousands of people worldwide. Some people experience
such things, and we need to pull their Kundalini down and make them okay. These people might feel that a Devi (Goddess)
enters their body and moves in strange ways, like they’re mad. Do you think a Devi has time to enter someone’s body? In reality,
it’s often women who have died, who come into the bodies of other women and create all this drama.
Many people struggle to let go of these ghosts (bhoots). For example, some gurus give a ring to someone, and the person ends
up giving away all the jewellery from their home and money to these sadhus or gurus. If you wonder why these gurus need
money that thought may bring you closer to true awakening. Now, how do you fill the middle void? The void can be filled with
pure love, such as a mother’s love or pure love for the world. Only a realized person can fill this void with love, allowing the
Kundalini to pass through it and rise upward for its upliftment. Sometimes, people may feel a heaviness in their head, but once it
passes through the 7Brahmarandra (crown chakra), it connects to God Almighty, and the connection is made.
The first sign of this awakening is that the person becomes thoughtless. This is the first stage in yoga—the time between two
thoughts, called "vilamb" (the space between two thoughts). Then, your attention (Chitta) automatically goes inward. Now, your
attention is focused on me. If you’re trying to focus your attention anywhere else, it’s difficult, but with awakening, your attention
automatically goes inward.
When there is an issue with a chakra (energy centre), we call it Badha (negativity). People with this issue may feel a slight
burning sensation. For example, when people are swimming, one person may struggle while another can help them. But without
knowledge, if someone tries to enter the water, flailing their arms, they’ll drown. In yoga, all you need to do is sit quietly, and it will
work itself out.
For those who are realized, they now know how their Kundalini moves, where it is stuck, how to overcome obstacles, and how to
move upward. They also understand how to work on the awakening of other people’s Kundalini. You will even understand the
fingertips of your hands and how they relate to this process.
For example, if you feel a burning sensation on the ring finger, it indicates the energy of the 6Agnya chakra. If the sensation is on
the middle finger, it’s related to the Nabhi chakra, sometimes with a stinging or burning sensation. We remove this with
Chaitanya (divine energy) or some mantras. The 5Vishuddhi chakra, related to the index finger, is connected to the cervical
plexus, which doctors recognize. If there is a burning sensation here and I place my index finger on it, the obstacle will go away.
The base of the hand corresponds to the 1Muladhara chakra (root chakra), and the middle of the palm relates to the 7Sahasrara
chakra (crown chakra). You can feel it there. If this area is caught, there may be a problem in the 6Agnya chakra, extending up to
the brain. Even children, after realization, can tell what’s wrong with a person. For example, a little girl named Sangita, who was 7
years old, went to Gwalior. Now children like her receive realization very quickly. If there’s too much cultural conditioning or
workaholism children remain innocent and are not as captured by these forces, which is why they can quickly tell us what’s
wrong.
Children, like a vice-chancellor, can give precise answers. For instance, there’s Mr. Chhatre (a Sahaja yogi), whose son Prasad I
asked to sit in front of me. If someone hasn’t received realization (i.e., their Kundalini has not reached the 7Sahasrara or crown
chakra), the child would simply say, “No, Shri Mataji, this person has not yet received realization.” This is the correct answer.
Children don’t lie. With a little practice, they become experts at this. Sangita, for example, cured many people. I received letters
from people who said that this 7-year-old girl had the power to cure. Actually, once the Kundalini is awakened and moves through
the middle channel (the parasympathetic nervous system), God's love fills it, and it works out on its own. It’s not about doing
anything—just awakening the Kundalini. Once it travels through the seven chakras and the central channel, it reaches the top.
These two sides (left and right channels) come into play, and with it, we can tell the person’s problems from their fingertips. All

diseases stem from imbalances in the seven chakras or energy centres.
The Kundalini is a dormant, coiled energy located at the top of the 1Muladhara chakra.
Doctors say there are 982 veins in the brain. The Sahasrara, the thousand-petal crown chakra at the top of the head, resembles
the petals of a lotus. I’ve seen this myself. Though I haven't counted them, it’s close to 1000. These petals look soft, like flames
of a gentle fire, and their colours are soft shades of blue, rose, purple, or orange. Beneath the petals, there is a stamen-like
structure, similar in colour and metallic in appearance.
I have witnessed how the Kundalini awakens and have awakened the Kundalini of thousands of people. Now, at nearly 50 years
old, I feel I fully understood this process when I reached the age of 47.
I’ve spoken on many subjects and done a lot of social work. I was on the film censor board, but I had never really spoken about
spirituality. Some people asked why I hadn’t spoken about religion or Dharma, but without the practical aspect, there’s no point. I
was waiting for the right moment. It’s like talking about rice when there is no rice to eat. There are many books on spirituality, but
without practical experience, they are of little use.
Some people claim their guru/master gave them something, but did they explain it clearly and openly? The answer is no. I have
already explained in great depth about psychology and Sahaja Yoga. Please read this information carefully.
Sometimes the beads in a garland may look different, but they are all linked together, aligned in the same direction. It happens
that some people will not experience Kundalini awakening because it requires a lot of penance and tapasya (spiritual discipline).
For these people, it’s not possible in this lifetime although some people may try to bypass this process. For instance, when we
were children, people said we might go to the moon by plane. And now through hard work and discipline we've reached the
moon.
Then, I did my research, and some people questioned me, saying, “You’re not a great scientist, just a simple housewife. How
could this be possible for you?” Remember, no matter how big your achievements are, your mother is bigger than you. And yes,
I’ve done this research.
Now, let’s get to the main part. We have to start meditation, but I can see that your Kundalini is awakened because I am
sweating. The Kundalini is the loving mother of everyone; it resides within you, and it cares for you. Sometimes, this Kundalini
tells me, “Please fix this child.” So, if you have complex problems, I first have to clear the obstacles, remove the complexity, and
make it calm and cool, then work things out. For the child it needs to be easy.
In America, I had a different experience. Please don’t get angry. The youngsters aged 16 to 25 are very good. I thought that great
and revered sadhus and yogis from India were born in America. People who are searching for truth from their heart have been
born there. The same happened in Japan, and we got all the back stock here.
What happens there is that, at one time, 200 people might receive realization at one place, now 3000 people get their realization.
Here, we see only a few people receiving it. Some people are there, using drugs and other harmful things in the name of
spirituality.
People often judge others based on the car they drive. For example, I was at the market with my big car, buying vegetables, and a
lady was cheating people. I confronted her, and she told me, “Back off. You have a big car, but how did you get it? Was it without
cheating?” Maybe she’s right, but not in my case, of course. Everyone cheats for money, but can anyone take their property or
money with them when they die?
But our children are good. Before they go to college, please give them realization. Once they go to college, we don’t know what
goes into their heads. After they go to college, they often become rebellious, make fun of everyone, and become naughty. Of

course, girls are often responsible for this.
Please start programs in schools and colleges; it’s very important. What I have found is that when mothers come to me, their
children receive realization quickly and easily. It seems like they are Bharata Varsa (India’s great souls) who have already come
here from the past. People from Maharashtra stick to it, but now they are trying to become too analytical for no reason.
I don’t mean Hindu, Muslim, or Christian, but when I refer to "Maharashtran," I mean someone who has grown up in Maharashtra,
specifically in Mumbai. Now, it’s possible to receive this realization in the train or even in an airplane. The power has increased
now.
When this power flows through your body, you will not feel tired—not just in the body, but it also affects your mind and inner self.
So, get this realization. If you don’t accept it, that’s fine. For example, in Maharashtra, touching someone’s feet is often a sign of
respect, but this is not necessary in Sahaja Yoga. Actually, vibrations come from my feet, and perhaps if you touch my feet, it
may cure you. It could also bring prosperity to your house. But what’s more important is that you want to experience the love of
Paramatman (God Almighty), and for that, you need to first receive this realization.
Otherwise, don’t come to my feet. Go to the stone idols if that’s what you believe in. I am not interested in you coming to my feet.
Other gurus may want this—they get ministers to come and touch their feet, but I am not interested in that. I don’t need a
certificate that ministers come to my feet. What your mother wants is to give everything to her child, all of it.
Now, I want to see how many children will come to receive this realization from me.
It’s time to take it. Please sit comfortably. Don’t sit with a heavy head; just like Shri Krishna’s leela (divine play), be at ease.
Some people have serious problems, and it’s okay for you to go and sit at the back. Some Sahaja Yogis will help you. For those
who are feeling fear, open your eyes wide and sit in front of me.
Everyone else, please close your eyes. While I was talking, some of you have already received your realization since I am here.
For example, if the Sun is shining, the light is bound to be there—there’s no question about that.
Now, close your eyes and watch your thoughts. Please don’t chant any mantra or take any name. It’s not that I’m against
mantras, but first, your connection with the divine has to happen. Once you’ve received your realization, then you can chant the
mantra or name.
A Sushumna nadi autonomous nervous system B Ida nadi Left sympathetic nervous system C Pingala nadi Right sympathetic
nervous system. 1 Muladhar chakra-pelvic plexus 2 Swadhishthan chakra -aortic plexus 3 Nabhi-Manipur chakra-solar plexus 3aVoid-Bhavasagara chakra no link in central channel 4 Anahat-heart chakra-cardiac plexus 5-Vishuddhi chakra-throat/vocal cord
(cervical plexus) 6 Agnya chakra-optic chiasm 7 Brahmarandra -Sahasrara chakra-thousand petal crown chakra (A chakra is an
energy centre). Kundalini is a dormant energy coiled above the Muladhar chakra.

1973-0125, Public Program
View online.
25 January 1973
Public Program
Bordi (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Reviewed
[Talk in Hindi]
So, if there is any trouble in your Swadishthan chakra, you can correct it by using your thumb. Now you have to see your
importance as to who you are.
You stand up in front of mirror, in this pose; there will be a change taking place in you.
You can make it out from the reflection falling on the mirror, what thing you are. You see your own reflection in that mirror.
Now you rub your Swadishthan using your hands, like this by pressing it, here also, like this, you will have throbbing on your hand.
Here, on your fingers also, here. Press it or shoot it, here. All the disturbances on your Swadishthan will vanish away. The
Swadishthan chakra is placed on the thumb.
Above that is a place of Manipur chakra, which is on a middle finger. All these (fingers) are not in a line, it is what it is. If there is a
burning sensation on your middle finger then you will see that the person, who is sitting in front of, has a problem on your Nabhi
chakra. Our style of applying Kumkum and other things, this is Manipur (half sentence). That is why, while eating, we never keep
this finger apart. It is always in alignment with other fingers.
Many people keep this finger apart while eating. It is a wrong practice. From the yoga point of view, it is wrong to eat with fork
and spoons. Because you have vibrations in your hands. But only for realized people. Those who are possessed, for them to eat
with fork and spoon is a good practice.
[Laughter]
No, our own bhoots go in our stomach. They are released from our hands, are doubled and some more are added and go back in
stomach. Therefore, those who are possessed with bhoots should use forks and spoons.
That’s why, in the West, they quite often use forks and spoons. [Laughter]
No, no we have much more bhoots than the Westerners.
Now these people [the Westerners] have started eating with hands. Really, it’s true, ask them. Nowadays many of them don’t use
forks and spoons.
They eat with neat and clean hands.
Now, this Manipur chakra is over, if any person is gluttonous and his attention is always on food, then he should rub this, the
middle finger. Now what will happen? Manipur chakra will become cool. Put some oil, nicely.
Now after this Manipur chakra, there is the Anahata chakra. This is a most delicate chakra.
Here is the finger for Anahata, this one-little finger which is the smallest finger. This is your Anahata. If anybody has heart trouble
or somebody is very romantic, always running after women every day, do it everyday from morning till evening, those who have
such weakness then he should rub it like this.
And the one who has a weakness for liquor should rub his Nabhi chakra’s finger. Daru Daru.
Now this Anahata chakra, those who are having disorders on Anahata chakra, should worship Shri Saraswati. He should keep his
attention towards reading and learning- no I am not telling about Anahata, I am telling about Swadishthan. Listen once again this
is Swadishthan chakra, the Swadishthan is below the Nabhi.
I will tell about Mooladhara later. Yes, the thumb represents the Swadishthan chakra.
Ok. Now those who have disturbances on Mooladhara should rub here. This, this is Mooladhara chakra. They should worship
Ganesha ji. The one who has a Mooladhara or a sex trouble should worship Shri Ganesha.

Now this is Swadishthan and after this comes Manipur chakra. Manipur chakra or Nabhi chakra or Solar plexus are the same
thing. And rub this. And the one who has lust for food – it means that person becomes gross in Swadishthan chakra and the
trouble of Swadishthan is very gross. He eats a lot, a lot, and the quantity is also very large. And he babbles a lot. Such a person
who eats a lot, should look towards Shri Saraswati on his Swadishthan chakra. Then he will get to finer fest [unsure]. He should
be creative and start paintings, diversion will follow and sublimation will take place. A man of Manipur chakra has interest in
food.
Politicians have a bad Nabhi chakra. To indulge in mischief, to say something to this and something to that, is the symptom of a
problem of the Nabhi chakra. The person who has this temperament, whose outlook is very mischievous, that he is just not at all
in peace. Unless and until he goes and sets a fire in somebody’s house, he does not get peace. Such type of person cannot see
the benevolence of others. Such a person is required to clear his Nabhi chakra.
Then, comes a person whose tongue is loose, the one who has no respect for others, specially the one who speaks loosely about
Sahaja Yoga. He has to clear his Nabhi chakra. Such a person is very “connoisseur” of food. He does not eat much. He is not
various, don’t each much but he is a “connoisseur”. He insists that the tea has to be excellent, want this and that. He is very
particular.
He is also very delicate about the issue relating to women. First, he becomes gross on Swadishthan and he wants a particular
type of woman and in this case, he is choosy, etc. That person should go in refuge of Shri Vishnu. The meaning of Shri Vishnu is
symbolic; it does not mean to be a Hindu, a Christian, or a Muslim. Who is Shri Vishnu? Palankarta, [the Maintainer of the
universe] the breadwinner of the world.
The one who has learnt how to look after every one as a mother, she is not be particular about food. If any mother is coquetry
about it then she should nurture four, five children so her coquetry is all finished. The woman who is very particular about food
cannot look after children. Because children will do potty, urinate, do this do that, she will get irritated. She should forcibly
nurture eight, ten children. Her coquetry will soon vanish away.
There is a point in correcting ourselves. And see for yourself if you get a feeling of abhorrence with everyone, “I get feeling of
abhorrence from this and from that “, he should nurture eight, ten dogs. Then it will be done. Nurture someone. And another point
is that he is to go deep down in Raja Yoga then it helps.By Raja Yoga I do not mean to that. I mean to say that go towards the
glory of Shri [Raja] Lakshmi. Now the glory of Lakshmi is not in money nor in husband. The meaning of Lakshmi is very
extensive.
Now above Manipur chakra is “Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh” [the Trinity], Heart.
[End of audio]

1973-0323, How the Divine is working within us?
View online.
23 March 1973
How The Divine Is Working Within Us?
Public Program
Cowasji Jehangir Hall, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
Shri Mataji: For example, if you discuss with a medical doctor, he will not be able to tell you what is a libido, which is the basis of
many psychological findings. If you ask the psychologist, he may not be able to tell you what are the symptoms of the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system.
Then, “yogashastri” (yoga experts) are regarded as something out of place. Perhaps we have never realised that all these
knowledge springs from one source, that is awareness. One source is giving all these flowers and still, we are separated. And we
are fighting with each other, not knowing that this is one source that has blossomed into so many flowers.
This disintegration leads us to confusion. And Kaliyuga, this modern age is known for its confusion. The religion, the dharma and
the adharma, both are confused. Right and wrong is a confused subject. Divine and satanic are confused. Keeping all things in
view, we have to be very open-minded, like a scientist. And find out how the Divine is working within us.
Some biologists who have been working on the subject of life, have brought about a very good thesis about the life that was
created in such a short time. According to those biologists, the time taken for a human life to evolve from the time when the
earth seceded from the sun, is too short to even create a life. They have given an explanation that if you apply the law of chance,
this is an impossibility.
Let us see what is the law of chance? The law of chance can be understood by a simple analogy. Supposing there are fifty red
marbles and fifty black marbles. Andthey are put in a jar and allowed to shake through some mechanical means, then you find
they all get mixed up. This is the chaos. And, when you try to bring them back to their original position, you find that it takes a
certain number of shaking which is the minimum required.
Please try to understand this analogy. It is a very simple analogy. There is a jar with fifty white or black and red pebbles or you
can call it small, round, these children play with that; that sort of thing. And you shake it. When you start shaking it, they become
all mixed up. So, from the chaos to the organised life, it is like a cell. Amoeba is an organised life, compared to matter. Even the
molecules are organised, even the atoms are organised, but they do not have the will to organise themselves. Or will to protect
themselves.
So to get to this organism which is life itself should have normally taken much more years than these two hundred billion years
which is a very short time. According to them, the time taken is say, ‘n’ raised to the power ‘xyz’. It is a mathematical thing; I don’t
want to go into that. Now the time that is taken is only ‘n’; leave alone raised to the power of anything. In that short time, to
evolve

such

a

complex

structure

like

a

human

being

by

chance

is

an

impossibility.

Is

absolutely

accepted.[UNCLEAR/accepted/absurd].
But when you see those pebbles, you can construct them in the proper way if there is a juggler. If somebody who knows how to
push the red ones to the red side and the black ones to the black side, you can manage that. This indicates that there is a juggler;
totally conscious and aware, with cosmic understanding and power, who is managing the show in such a short time.
For the scientist, it is only to point out that there is some juggler. They cannot explain any further. [UNCLEAR/one]. Now let us
see what the psychologists have to say on the subject. The psychologists believe and have accepted in toto. The fact that there

is a universal being within ourselves,without, they have not yet accepted. But within ourselves who binds us together, because
when we are asleep and when we submerge ourselves into our subconscious mind, we find certain symbols appearing in our
dream.
There is a theory forwarded by many psychologists and supported by them; that these symbols appear universally the same in
everything. For example, if this Universal Unconscious wants to suggest that you are going to be murdered, or there is a danger
to you through some violence, or instrument of violence. You see a triangular, elongated symbol.
Whether you are an Indian, whether you are an American, whether you are a Japanese or a Russian, makes no difference to the
symbol. That means there is a Being which is working universally through the symbols.
There is another thing which many psychologists support, that the Unconscious is all the time trying to keep us on the right
track. It gives us balance. For example, I will quote Jung, j-u-n-g, who has given two examples of the balance that the
Unconscious has suggested in symptoms.[UNCLEAR].
One gentleman came to him and told him that, “I just dream. And in my dream, invariably, I am placed before my son, who is a
king. Sometimes I find I have lost my way. Sometimes I can’t catch a train. See all kinds of tragic things in my dream and
ultimately I find I am landed before my son who is sitting on a throne, like a king”. So, Mr Jung asked him, “What are your
relations with your son?”. This gentleman said, “You see, he is a son from my first wife, and my second wife is not very happy
with him. So I keep him out. But still, I should say I have done no justice to him as a father”.
Mr Jung said, “The Unconscious is teaching you that you respect him because he is a king”. One day such a man will repent in
his own heart for treating his own son like that, who depends on his father for all the love and protection.
Another case is that of a girl who came to him and told him that, “I dream that my mother is a witch. And it is so common that
now I am fed up of that dream. And I don’t want to accept such a horrible thing about my mother”. So he asked her, “How are you
placed [UNCLEAR/living/placed] with your mother? Are you happy with her?”.
She said, “I am an only child born after a long time. I am very much pampered by her. And she allows me to do whatever I like.
She doesn’t say anything to me. She says, ‘I just want you to be happy and do whatever you feel. I have nothing to say about it.
Sometimes I am even confused. She gives me no guidance and takes no responsibility as guiding me. Neither she discuss any
one of her experiences with me. As a result, I have become a spoiled person. I have become a very fussy person and I have
become intolerably hot-tempered”. So the deduction was that the Unconscious is giving you the suggestion that, “My child, be
careful. You will become a witch. If you listen to this witch”.
Now, by saying there is a universal Being, there is a universal consciousness, an awareness that is working in us; you are just
giving a name to something. It doesn’t explain. It is like saying there is a juggler doing the job or like saying there is a Universal
Being who is looking after you and guiding you and giving you the balance. They call it the “intuition drive” and all the names.
Now let us see the medical sciences; what they have to say. When you go to a medical man and ask him a simple question that,
“Please let me know what is making my heart pulsate? What is controlling my diseases [UNCLEAR]. What is looking after my
respiration?”. He will just say that “There is a system known as the autonomous nervous system which is responsible for this
regulation”. This is another name given to the same Universal Divine.
This is not to decry them at all nor in any way to belittle their efforts at finding. On the contrary, whatever they have found out,
they have reached a place where now they have to say there is something that is to be still bridged. That is still to be understood.
There are two autonomous nervous systems in our body. One is the parasympathetic and another is the sympathetic nervous
system.
Now the sympathetic nervous system is again divided into the right and left side and the parasympathetic nervous system is in

the centre. The person who is a right-hander has his left side sympathetic working while the left-hander has his left (should be
right) side sympathetic working. Now one remains absolutely quiet.
Now both these sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems are responsible, one for activity, another for inactivity. One
constricts, another relaxes. One puts you to tension, another one makes you absolutely restful. The sympathetic nervous system
has placed a very great, difficult problem for the doctors now. With the over-activity of the sympathetic nervous system, you get
the disease known as cancer.
When there is an irritation in the body and when some sort of protection is needed, that part starts getting more active and the
cell starts multiplying. The sympathetic nervous system works to protect that part. But ultimately results in the malignancy that
is more activity of the cell in that part. This is a simple thing that is known as cancer.
The advent of cancer in the kaliyuga is now a challenge to all the scientists of the world. For nobody can escape it if they do not
now realise that's not the activity of man that is going to give him salvation – but the inactive. But for parasympathetic they say it
is not humanly possible to control the parasympathetic.
For example, you can, by working harder or running more, you can make your heart pulsate more; but you cannot relax your heart.
That is not in your hands. They say there is another force working which looks after the relaxation of the heart. The yogashastra
which has, for so many years been describing the Kundalini is nothing but the [sinking] parasympathetic nervous system.
The parasympathetic nervous system is the gross expression of that system which is in the spinal cord. In the spinal cord, we
call it the Kundalini and the chakras. The centres that guide; the centres and plexuses outside are known as the chakras. For
example, your hand has got a centre in the head. In the same way, these plexuses which are in our being, which are namely,
down below you can start, the pelvic plexus. Then you have got the aortic plexus, then you have got the solar plexus, then you
have got the cardiac plexus. Then you have got, I have forgotten the English name for it, you have got the Swadishthana
(Vishuddhi?) chakra here.
Then we have got here, the Agyna chakra here we call it. But this one though we call it the Agyna chakra in yogashastra; in the
medical science, there is no name as Agyna chakra. But they accept that there can be a “third eye”. But this is something very
hypothetical as far as medical science is concerned. So the Agyna chakra which is actually in the optic chiasma, in the centre of
the brain, where both the optic nerves cross is, according to the yogashastra is the Agyna chakra. It is placed there.
And the Sahasrara , when you open out the brain, you will find that there are petal-like designs on the brain. If you vertically cut it
you will find that there are petals in petals. And these designs are, according to medical sciences, are nine hundred and
eighty-two. While according to the yogashastras, they are one thousand.
Now, My own knowledge is not scientific. I am very sorry to say that. Mine is subjective knowledge. Scientific knowledge is
objective. I have seen all these chakras within Myself. And you also can see all of them if you get realisation according to My
Sahaja Yoga. And if you go deeper into your being, you can see all of them. Because Self-realisation means, you should know
yourself and the power that is guiding you.
The last Sahasrara is the one-thousand petalled .I have seen as flames, thousands of flames
clustered together. In the Bible, there is a beautiful sentence, “I will appear before you like the tons of flame”. And actually like the
tons of flames you see that.
Whether you read the Bible or Koran, you will find many instances, many sentences by which you can see that there is an
integration of the Kundalini in all of them – and it is described. The only trouble is, that the Bible was written by many people who
[UNCLEAR] in different parts of the country and they also saw part by part. And because of this kind of separate experiences, the
knowledge that is in the Bible is scattered. But if somebody can sit down and try to find out, you can find the complete

description of the Kundalini in the Bible.
So scientifically, when you talk about it, it is still of this. Now scientifically, I can prove that this loudspeaker works in such and
such way, that it carries the sound waves to you. But when I have to deal with life, you have to come to the Divine, to the Divine
Love.
Just think, that man despite all his scientific findings has not been able to create life. We cannot create one plant out of a seed.
While somebody is doing that, crores and crores of these, so many wonderful miracles every moment. And we have taken them
for granted.
Do we ever think how a flower suddenly becomes a fruit? If we look at a flower scientifically, we can say that there is pollen, and
there is a pollen jar and they mix it up and this happens. But how? Why? Who works it out? What is the dominating force that
works out? Can you do thatif you mix up pollen with pollen work can you do (it) that way? You cannot.
So there is some superhuman being, somebody who is much more powerful than you, who is doing these things just like a play.
So when you come to Divine Love, you know that it is just a play. Tomorrow I will be explaining to you how My Sahaja Yoga works
through Divine Love. And how it is effortless.
But when we cannot take out even one plant out of a seed, let us forget that we have done great work [UNCLEAR/work]. We are
unnecessarily carrying the load of doing something that is absolutely dead. If we have some dead stone and we create a
beautiful building like this and we think we have done a great job.
Science can deal with the dead but not with the living. When they come to living sciences like biology, medical science and
psychology, you know what happens; they stop at a point. With physics, you can go on explaining things, but with life, it is not
possible.
Even with physics, you cannot explain beyond a point. They will say there is gravity which is attracting the Earth. But who has
brought this gravity? From where it has come? If there was no gravity, we would not have been here. If the ocean, the Atlantic
Ocean or Pacific ocean, was slightly deeper than what it is; there would have been no life. There are so many points that
scientists can quote which show that the whole creation is very, very balanced and beautifully created.
But I know the question that is hovering in your mind,“Then why all this misery? Only the science can eradicate the misery”. It
can, up to partially, that is, physical. Very partially. But I have seen many physically fit people. They are very miserable. Some of
the “pehelwans” (wrestlers) they come to Me and tell Me, “Mataji, give us some peace of mind. We want some joy within
ourselves”.
So, that is what science has done, that physically they have helped. Mentally also, some psychologists definitely have helped
also. You cannot deny that. But what do they help is just to keep you sane for a while. It is not just sanity; it is much more than
that. Much more dynamic which is working the whole plan of this universe. And this is the place we have reached now. Which I
call the modern times. Which is the most fitted for the jumping of the human beings to the other side of evolution.
This is the blossom time for us. Of course when there is the blossom time, you find also the serpents hovering around. So the
equal and opposite forces are at work. And scientists are the first who will help to build up the positivity in this respect, of that I
am very sure. Because in America when I talk to the doctors and the neurologists, some of them visited this place. And they
going to organise a conference of the doctors. I was amazed by the way they opened their mind to My speech.
Of course, in America, there is a funny law that you cannot cure anyone. If you cure, you will be put behind the bars if you are not
a doctor. But I do not know any cure. I just ask people to put their hands towards Me. Scientifically they cannot prove that I have
done any cure. Except that when they see the blood count and when they see the X-ray, they know that the cancer is cured.

But otherwise, they cannot catch Me. Still, I did not want to have that risk because I did not have that much foreign exchange. But
I feel that knowledge will come one day maybe from America, reflected back to India. If the medical people [UNCLEAR/people]
and the psychologists, I have some people who are My disciples and My children who have been very much benefitted, who are
doctors as well as psychiatrists.
If they could come with a open heart. For I am a Mother. I am not here to (in) any way decry them or to insult them. But to give
them the whole, entire knowledge that they have been seeking. With all My love and dedication. If they could gather up that much
courage and don’t worry about their practice, it would never be [UNCLEAR]. For who creates the wealth? Who creates the beauty?
Who creates everything that is around? Is the one who is seeking, then you [UNCLEAR].
[UNCLEAR/try] understand that these things which are so important to you scientifically, there is a science of economics; certain
things are very important. Your priorities change suddenly. Because after all, you all have been searching. The humankind is
wandering, working, labouring, just to find joy. All this is to have joy in people’s lives and when you get that, all artificial things
that are supposed to make you happy just drop off.
Tomorrow we are going to have a meditation at about eight-thirty sharp. I would request you people to come and see for yourself
because I can scientifically show you the breathing of the Kundalini. If you get your realisation as some of the doctors in Pune
got it. I told them that, “Now I will show you the centres and chakras about which we have been talking. You can come and see
them with your own hands”. And they were amazed. They said, “How could we see that?”. I said, “With the vibrations that you
have [UNCLEAR/you are given]”.
I will request you to come with a open mind and see for yourself. Don’t depend on the stories of others. I don’t want any gurudom
here. You cannot give Me anything, I can assure you. Except that you accept My love which is overflowing from My Being. Just if
you could spare some time and see for yourself, the Kundalini, the breathing of the Kundalini. How it [UNCLEAR/stays] and how it
works, so beautifully.
And some of the mistakes committed by very unwise psychologists like Freud has also been committed by some of the
yogashastra people. Whatever they feel in the books may not corrected; true. And because of a certain mistakes committed by
them, the Kundalini itself has created problems for seekers. But so far in Bombay, at least ten thousand people must have
received Kundalini “jagruti” (awakening). But not a single person I have known, who has suffered any kind of trouble, or any
dancing, or becoming nude, or shouting. Or any kind of foolish efforts to express, advertise that you are awakened
[UNCLEAR/awakened]. [UNCLEAR].[there is a small sentence which is unaudiable.]
Whom are we deceiving? When it works, it works silently. Automatically within yourself. And the greatest [UNCLEAR] scientific
way, that you yourself know that you are realised. You yourself feel the vibrations through you and you yourself can awaken the
Kundalini of others and can see and feel the Kundalini of others.
The Divine has no interest whatsoever whether you are a householder or a sanyasi. [UNCLEAR for twenty to thirty seconds]. Just
think of the divine and it’s work. The divine has no interest at all that something have something. Like they give now a days
[human being] like that.[ there are two more sentences, which are not clear] On this subject also, I am going to speak on
Thursday, where I will be describing the libido. Tomorrow I will be [UNCLEAR] Sahaja Yoga where we will be describing the
parasympathetic. And thirdday the libido which is on the right-hand side of the sympathetic nervous system.
After that, we will have a [UNCLEAR] session. All are cordially invited to come.
Never to feel before a Mother that you have committed a sin. It hurts the very soul of My heart to know that how can My children
sin? To a Mother, you are the dearest.
And you yourself are so beautiful and so great. So glorious and so fragrant with love that you are not aware. Once you are aware

of that, you will be aware of that [UNCLEAR].
Thank you very much. I really thank you. And I hope you will make it convenient to come tomorrow and the day after.
[Applause and end of recording].

1973-0324, We have gone too far away from our sources
View online.
24 March 1973
We Have Gone Too Far Away From Our Sources
Public Program
Cowasji Jehangir Hall, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) - In Progress

1973-0324, Two forces
View online.
24 March 1973
Two Forces
Public Program
Cowasji Jehangir Hall, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
TRANSCRIPT OF PUBLIC PROGRAM DAY 2 JEHANGIR HALL MUMBAI 24-03-1973
Shri Mataji: When we say it is the jet age, what do we mean? It means we human beings have discovered a way of conquering
the gravitational force through the jet. A challenge of the gravitational force has been accepted and overcome now. We have, in
this modern age created not only a jet which has a propeller; if not the propeller we have got the supersonic arrangement – but
also we have got spacecraft which can carry us to the moon. This is a very, very unique discovery, fantastic beyond our
imagination.
When I was a young girl in a school, they used to calculate all - the girls sitting down sometime; how many years it would take
human beings to go to the moon with the fastest train. Or at the most an aeroplane - that we had in our childhood. And in My own
lifetime, I can see that people have already landed there. We have advanced very much outside through the help of science. The
outside expression has been fantastic, beyond our comprehension.
But the problem arises when the tree grows beyond its sources; huge and big, must seek its source. Otherwise, it is going to die
out. This is the problem of our jet age that we have gone too far away from our sources. And now we must see the source on
which we are existing and have to exist. And we must find out the core of that source. So, that such a big organism which grown
out of proportion must survive. If not, the complete destruction is awaiting us. There are two forces always acting and
interacting. One is the constructive, another is the destructive. Throughout, since the human being – when he was a poor thing
really; at the mercy of wild animals, grew in fear, later on, became a mighty power. And now is conquering all the soil of the
Universe.
These two forces, as I call them positive and negative, are essential for any growth. But it is for us, the intelligent, modern man to
decide if we are heading for destruction. Are we doing anything to stop it? Where are we going? And what are we going to give
our children? The handling of the spacecraft or going to the moon. Is that all? Or these dead buildings that are hovering all over
the places? Jet age has a very great message that the responsibility of man is the greatest. When we work out together, we put
up a jet or a spacecraft. We have to work out together, en masse, to bring out the inflow of the Divine power that has nourished
us and is needed now for further [inaudible/discussion].
As I have told you, that My knowledge is all subjective. I have not read any books on these subjects, perhaps I have no time to do
that or I do not need to do that. Of course, I have to know the terminology which is man-made and artificial. But to communicate,
one has to know those words. With this subjective knowledge, if I start talking to you, the whole thing will sound extremely
fantastic. Because you are still objective. Now the time has arrived for all you to be the subject, to be the witness of that great,
dynamic force which has brought about the whole creation. When I speak to you, it is through My subjective knowledge. It may
not appeal to you today perhaps, but it will when you get your self-realisation and go deep into the understanding of what I am
talking to you.
The creation, how it was created I will be speaking later in that Hindi seminar. But let us see what has happened in the case of
human beings. In the case of human beings, the brain has a triangular shape. And this triangular shape acts like a prism when
the ray of consciousness passes through his fontanelle bone, the tip of his brain, and enters into his personality of the foetus
which is made out of the material power. There are two powers – the material power which creates the foetus and the conscious

power, the pranava, which enters the foetus at the age of three months. While passing through the brain, it gets refracted. You
can see from the prism that one ray, when it passes from the sun, gets refracted into seven colours. In the same way, this
consciousness gets refracted into three powers. Three energies.
One energy is to enlighten our central nervous system which is necessary to look after our body. The other two are the
parasympathetic and the sympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic nervous system is not yet much known to the
medical people. When I talk of Kundalini, I talk of the parasympathetic nervous system. One of the energies – these three
energies, the one that is the parasympathetic, pierces through the central part, here in the fontanelle bone, passes through the
central part of the brain, through the base of the brain; it is known as [inaudible/mudha] in yoga shastra. Which is the place
where the optic chiasma is created. And goes down into the spinal cord and coils, in three and a half coils into the triangular
bone.
You can easily ask Me, “How do you say that?”. But now many doctors will support Me. Thank God they are also realised. That
they can feel it and see it themselves in their own being – the three powers working. It is a luminosity that is visible after
self-realisation when you reach the third stage which I call the “Soham Dasha” (Soham – I am That, Dasha – state).
This Kundalini, when it settles down in the triangular bone; why it is three and a half coils and all that - has a very big meaning. Of
course, I am writing a book; I am trying to write a book. So far I have not been able to start it also. Because every time I start
writing, I think it will become another Bible or Gita. And people will start remembering it by heart. And that may stop their
self-realisation altogether. This Kundalini, when it is settled in the triangular bone, it takes charge of the foetus and it is
responsible for the growth, the entire working of that foetus, and is the divine force that is all the time, settled in that part. This is
the Kundalini. The other two I will be discussing tomorrow when I discuss all the gurudom of India. They are all working on the
other thing – this or that.
Now, this Kundalini – just now you have heard the shloka about the Bhagwati, who is the pranava rupa. She is the embodiment of
this awareness, which is called as pranava. It is the breath, the holy breath of the Holy Ghost as described in the Bible. Who can
incarnate also and has been incarnating many a time to save the whole world from disaster. This Kundalini is your mother.
Sitting in the triangular bone – is a very important point. Because this is what has caused the trouble for people who do not know
much about Kundalini and who are misusing their half-knowledge. Kundalini is in the triangular bone which is the Mooladhara as
we call it and not in the sex at all. This is a very, very important part of the yoga shastra which many have missed – even the
tantrikas have missed it completely. That is your mother sitting in the triangular bone to give you the re-birth.
The other day, a boy from a guruji came to Me and asked Me a question which you should know was very interesting. “Mataji,
after all, sex is important. We have come in this world for sex”. I said, “I agree”. Now even this is a funny statement, but I said I
agreed. But I said, “But you want to have your re-birth”. “Yes”, he said, “I want to have my re-birth”. “Now can you have your
re-birth by doing sex. Can you have your birth by doing sex?”. He said “No”. Then I said, “How can you get your re-birth through
sex?”. Just see. Now it is your mother settled down in the triangular bone for you to have your re-birth. And foolishly you are
putting sex on her. Can there be a greater insult to your mother? This is the Holy Ghost.
This is again because of this jet age; this is the age of confusion. Where the religion and irreligion, the dharma and adharma is
completely confused. They will prescribe the sex with the mother? That is why you find many books which tell you that the
Kundalini gets angry. The Kundalini gets into a temper and she rises, and she does this – she burns you and she does all kinds of
things. She will; any mother would if she is a mother. Thank God in India at least, Mr Freud has not been able to reach out much.
We still have our motherhood in our country. Thank God that something you have, something really great in this country. That a
mother could be brought to the level of sex, is something absurd. Mother will forgive, even if you kill her, murder her. But can she
tolerate such nonsense? She cannot.
In this jet age, people have the freedom to seek. And do whatever they like. For example, if Ravana was to be born in this country,
he can very well settle down here. And call himself a God and preach such horrible things to destroy all the Sitas of this country.
It is quite possible in the jet age; everybody has the freedom to do whatever he likes. Persons like Freud who were

[inaudible/youngsters] must have been very perverted, of a degraded temperament at the time. Of course, they have been
discarded in other countries. But they have left a very indelible mark on society. And in America, I was shocked to see that how
the motherhood of American women is completely disturbed and just lost. They have no faith in their motherhood left.
There was a [UNCLEAR], who had a boy who was a twelve-year-old who had taken to drastic drugs. But when the child came to
Me, I hugged the child to My heart and I kissed the child and I said, “What is the matter?”. The child wept just like a [inaudible] and
told me that my mother has never loved me like that. And mother told Me, “You know, we have a system by which we are not
supposed to touch our children like this”. I said, “What system do you have here?”. She told Me when the child is born, it is kept
away while the dogs and the cats sleep in the bedroom. And the children, they do not know their mother, so when they are
sixteen or seventeen years old, they will marry a woman who is sixty years old. Naturally. Because they are seeking their mother.
Only through marriage, you can have a relationship with others, through sex only – otherwise, there is no relationship. This is
what the jet age is.
Because the sublimation to the divine has also to come through sex? What is sex? It is just like a nose and eyes you have, even
much less important than that. So much importance has been given in psychology to this nonsensical thing. Is also responsible
for killing the motherhood of American women. Not only in America, in most of the Western countries, where they are affluent.
They are the richest people as far as spirituality is concerned. They are the people who have now gone beyond materialism and
are seeking. But this is the handicap with them, poor children – they have not known their mother.
While in our country – you know my husband was with Lal Bahadur Shastri. Shastriji used to get up every day in the morning four
o clock, go and sleep with his mother for a while, cuddle her and then go out for his work. He would never go out from his house
before touching his mother’s feet. And she would kiss him on his forehead; I have seen it with My own eyes. And there, the
woman tells Me, the mother tells Me that, “I will develop a guilt”. I said, “What guilt? What guilt? You are the Mother. You are
beyond guilt”. But this hypnotism of the psychologist – though they are very poor things now, and they have gone very far with
the correction; they have now written many books on this. But still mister Freud [inaudible/rules]. Because it is attractive to talk
of something nonsensical. People get attracted to that and they do not want to give up on the idea because it suits them also.
But it does not suit your Kundalini at all. And wherever you have heard about people getting into horrible experiences, of getting
burnt, falling down and so many are described in the big, big books written about Kundalini. Because your mother, see Kundalini
is never excited to sex but to divine love; to the pure holy love of a mother. Now, this morning you have seen I have given “jagruti”
(awakening) and realisation to quite a lot of people. And I have done that for so many people. You all can see for yourself that
sex has nothing to do. Whatever may be the efforts of the negativity to create darkness, one must know that this happens only
because the sun has to rise. There is the night because the day has to be there. And the morn will give you the blessings of the
Divine.
In the jet age, the biggest problem is of misguided sex. Beware. I am not for suppression of the so-called asceticism, sanyasa or
the running away from the house or family. That is another extreme. Of perverseness. Is an advertisement that you are very
spiritual – you have sacrificed this; you have sacrificed that. These are the days of advertisement. Those who can advertise are
attractive. The attention has become so superficial that if somebody is well dressed, we suddenly think that he is very nice. If
somebody is not properly dressed, we cannot see the beauty of that personality. We just cannot. We have become extremely
superficial in this jet age.
The biggest handicap I see, while giving realisation to people is the heaviness on the psyche of these people with the artificial
guilt created. That is why, in the countries which are very affluent, you will find more people committing suicide. More people
running away from reality. Or taking to another extreme of sanyasa. The other day some people came to see Me and told Me,
“Mataji, you are living in luxury”. I do not know what [inaudible]. “And how do you say you are Goddess?”. They know My husband
is supposed to be a very great man. Now, what am I to do? But you will be surprised that a person who is endowed with the
Divine – it does not matter whether he sleeps on the street or sleeps in the best possible place. Such a person can walk for miles
without fatigue and can dress like a queen in her beautiful clothes.

But I was insulted the way these people asked Me. So I told them, “ What have you done to get to religion – I would like to know.”
So they started, “I have sacrificed my family, we have sacrificed our houses, we have sacrificed everything”.
I said, “If I am not holding onto anything, what can I sacrifice, you tell Me. Can you sacrifice these keys?”. He said, “How can we
because it is not ours”. I said, “ Who said it is not yours?”. Only thing, foolishly you have registered it here that this thing is mine.
Tomorrow when you die, you will leave everything here, with the keys and everything lying for again the caretaker to come and
dispose of it for income tax purposes. Because you are holding on to that subtle idea that I have done this, I have done that, I
have sacrificed this, I am a very great sanyasi. You can never get to the real treasure that is inside.
You should watch a tree for a living example – that a tree grows and the vibrations inside that are keeping it alive; all this energy
which is working within it is just flowing. What does it matter where the flower comes, whether it is a blue flower or yellow
flower? Doing anything in the name of religion brings you the other energy, as I told you, the sympathetic nervous system. Which
is right and left. The one who is a right-handed – his left sympathetic is active and right is dormant. Now, in the solar plexus, we
have a problem that the solar plexus is connected with both the sympathetic nervous systems. As soon as your attention goes
onto any activity, you go to sympathetic. And mother, the Mother Divine, has to pass through the central path that is, the
“madhyamarga” – is parasympathetic.
Naturally, in the name of religion also, you start doing something. And there suddenly you get in contact with over-activity leading
to malignancy, or – which is much more dangerous; you get in contact with “paralok”, the dead. So, in the jet age when I was
born; from my childhood, I was searching for a way out. For all of you to understand, that you are doing nothing. It is Me who is
working through you and the ego is deliberately created in you – to make you feel you have to do something. And ultimately the
same ego is going to take you to your awareness, to your consciousness through which you are getting your nourishment. Now
as this mike is developed fully, in the same way, a human being is developed- fully, completely. He may [inaudible/fall], he will
see, he understands the creation. And to enjoy. And to see the beauty of love.
This connection has to be put to the main switch so that [inaudible/power can operate]. This is what the Kundalini Yoga is,
simple. Now if you ask Me the mechanism of this mike, it is a very difficult thing. The engineering is done. I know your
connections. I have to put it to the Divine. For this, you are not to sit on the fence in this jet age, I must tell you. Because, either
you come to the parasympathetic or you get to the dead that is the subconscious mind; which all these gurus are trying on you.
And otherwise, through your left-hand side sympathetic nervous system which is going to give you diseases like cancer.
Apart from this, the problem of the jet age is that before the advent of Rama, Ravana was born. And that is why Rama had to
come. Before the advent of Christ, Herod was born. Before Krishna – actually, Krishna got his birth because Kamsa was there.
And Bhagavati took her forms always to kill some demons. But I tell you, this is killing has helped us not much, because all of
them are back again. In the [inaudible]. This Krishna’s [inaudible] shakti, only their bodies were killed.
And now they are back again, with banners. As if they are the godmen. The other day is lady told Me that her teacher is a
goddess. I said, “How do you say?”. She said, “Yes, she is a Durga Goddess”. I said, “How do you know?”. “When you touch her,
she falls down”. I said, “Is that the way to know the Goddess? In the whole shastras, how She has been described, you should
find out. She is a Pranavarupa Kundalini. This woman does not even know what is the Kundalini. And still, she is talking about
being the Goddess?”.
Kundalini must move on your finger. That is God. Is a sign of Mother Goddess. Just by proclaiming that you are this and that –
only in the jet age you can collect money and publicity and not [inaudible]. Can you transform human beings? But who wants
that? Who wants to give peace and joy to others? Who is in love with humanity? Who is thinking of thousands and thousands of
people being [inaudible] of their Kundalinis in this jet age? This is another problem of all the rakshasas being reborn. All the
negativity, all the darkness – is just darkness of the Kalayuga. This is against our structure. And to talk of positivity, and to think
of positivity; sometimes one gives but not [inaudible].

Because I know that I can give en masse realisation to you all, and the source of that Divine can be brought to your own beautiful
being. And there are thousands who are negative but there are crores who are positive by nature. And the positivity is going to
win over through the system of Sahaja Yoga, which I have discovered. Actually, I have not discovered it; it was there but I did not
know about it, how it works. The blossom time is there, so many flowers. And the bees have to just hover around to transform
them into fruits. The whole thing is going to be planned and worked out by the Supreme. And I am sure of this; that this age of
struggle and confusion will end.
But please do not sit on the fence. People always tell Me, “Mataji, you must give us a speech”. When I start giving them a speech,
they will say they forget. They will write it down. What are you doing? This is a real speechophobia, I call it. In this jet age,
everybody wants to give a speech. And people are so anxious to listen to the speech, they will not come for meditation – but they
will come for speech. Speech is just a thought. What is it going to give you – My speech is nothing to you. Even the touching of
My Feet means nothing to you because you are not realised. You cannot feel the vibrations that are flowing through these Feet.
Unless and until you are realised. But when I tell people they say – how can that be? That is so.
You have to get your realisation. Do not sit on the fence. You are doing the greatest offence not only to yourself but also to
society. To the entire evolutionary method. If this same [inaudible] fails, then we will be the one who will be blamed. And the
great “samhara” or the destruction will be there. If you do not get realisation, does not mean others cannot get it. You will also
get it, have patience.
Now so many people have asked Me, ”Mataji, how can there be so many realisations?”. Why not? Actually, it has been the
opposite – negativity you catch like that. Why shouldn’t you ask, why there are so many flu cases? If you can catch flu, you can
catch a cold, devils are sitting on you – their vibrations; why not the positivity?
The blossom time has come. In this “mayapuri” (city of maya) that is Bombay, I have been working for the last three years. It is
with very great difficulty thousand people are being realised. And realisation does not mean that you have become a perfect
man. That you have become a perfect instrument of God. No. Whatever is missing is [inaudible/good] is not so. You must see,
that is a scientific way of looking, whatever is there. You must find out after realisation. It is like the [inaudible] that has to grow.
Some people tell Me, “Mataji, why do you call it self-realisation?”. I said, “What should I call it?”. Supposing a child is born a
human being, should I call him a bee? It has to grow. And then you have to grow into doubtless awareness and into the soham
state. In the beginning, you get the thoughtless awareness, the inner silence is established. So many books have been written
about this inner silence. “Do you mean to say, that is never going to fulfil?”. Yes, the calm and peace can [inaudible] – do you
mean to say God can never have mercy on you?
But why this hesitation about something. Supposing tomorrow I tell that there is a diamond for free distribution here. You won’t
even think whether it is a diamond or serpent sitting there. So why this hesitation in this absolutely free distribution of love? We
have no time. People are watching their watches. This is a very good thing which has happened, but we have no time. We are
saving our time, most definitely. Saving for what?
“We must save time; we have got watches; we must save time”. There was a gentleman who was very anxious to go to London.
And he told Me, “I must go by this date”. I said, “Does not matter. Go tomorrow, does not matter; you have not got a ticket”. He
said, “No, no, you must organise”. I said, “It is too much, but still, so why do you want to go?”. So he said something, “You know, I
have to attend a ball which is in London.”
You have never had such dinner parties, such card playing or hold women in the club, as we have in the jet age. Our mothers
were much more wiser than we are. Definitely. We have never had all these problems before. The way we are running all of us,
like mad people we are running morning and evening, running and running and running – what has happened? Why are you
running? Where are you running? Oh, you have a problem with [inaudible]. Now go to America, learn from them – that those who

have solved their material problems are asking for God. [Inaudible for nearly 20 seconds]. Because they wanted to earn money to
buy some helicopter to go to hell directly. This is what the jet age is.
Man is very intelligent no doubt, but he has no wisdom of any kind. He has no wisdom of any kind in this jet age. If he had
wisdom, he would have known how to preserve his Kundalini, his holiness and his purity. Now psychologically also, when we talk
of symbols, we must know that when you are realised – you go into thoughtless awareness which gives you collective
consciousness. Which you must have noticed in the morning when so many others who had got realisation could feel your
Kundalini. They tell me the psyche was heavy, it was burning.
You should come and see for yourself. If you can spare some time for cinema it is very important to come [inaudible]. Please
come and have a look at this. I am not against cinema. I am not against enjoyment. But you are really not enjoying yourself, I
assure you. Not even your possessions which are so beautiful.
I have seen a beautiful painting in a house. And the gentleman was telling Me, “I have paid so much money for this, I have paid so
much money for that”. And I was just enjoying the painting. Because there was no thought between the painting and Myself. The
complete joy was vibrating into My being.
You are not even enjoying a part of the music that was played today or ever played for you. Because the thoughts that are there
within [inaudible/seek] you to possess it. And also make you jump from moment to moment to other places to take your
attention outside. You cannot enjoy the beauty. Of the creation of matter, leave alone human being which is the most beautiful
creation. Which a realised person can.
When a person gets realisation; those who are realised – when they are placing their hands on the realised soul, the vibrations
get reflected from that beautiful soul makes him very happy and joyous. The joy that cannot be described. And they just go on
saying, “Ah ha ha”, as if they have heard some [inaudible/beautiful] melody, some beautiful raga. And it is various types, various
varieties. Such beautiful human beings are created in this jet age. And what are we seeking?
Let us for a minute sit down and think, what are we seeking? Have we got peace and joy which was promised with these
possessions? I am not against possessions as I have told you. It is not only this extreme or that extreme, I am talking of the
madhyamarg. But then people who have discovered that the possessions are of no use, they have become hippies. Now see the
hippies. They have started giving up this, giving up that. And then taking to drugs.
It is not [inaudible] and accepting but standing up within yourself and see that you are a beautiful soul. That you are so glorious.
And you are just the instrument of that Divine Love which cures automatically. The other person who is asking for Divine Love.
With this awakening to the mother which is waiting for some divine vibrations to arise her and the signal that now you can rise.
This love fills the gap in the man which I call as Void and is physically [inaudible] above the solar plexus.
Without filling the being with love, with Divine Love, your mother is not going to rise. You must respect her. You must respect her.
And with that respect, when she gets the Divine Love, she rises in her dignity. And when she rises, she does not want to give you
the slightest trouble. [Inaudible], she stops, and [inaudible] she says, “Mother please cure me. Please cure my child otherwise I
will not rise”.
What a loving Mother you have as Kundalini. And while all these things are said against her, it burns My heart. Your mother
[inaudible], you have refused, just spoilt to such a limit which is satanic. It is not ignorance, positively I can say, it is satanic.
Do not play into the hands of Satan. You yourself are the most powerful human. What I do is just throw you into your own ocean
of power. I do not do anything else. I just pour a little water on the seed of Kundalini and it rises and [inaudible]. My work is over
and then you find your own beauty.
In the collective consciousness, you cure people. In the modern age, you have also got the idea to serve. After the material

search is the idea of serve others. Who is the other between you and Me, I do not know. Because your attention is outside, that is
why you are all separate and divided. But the [inaudible] who is continuous and if My [inaudible for a few words], then who is the
other? If this hand is hitting this hand, what is the [inaudible/favour] you are doing? What is the social work you are doing? All is
[inaudible] nothing.
While, after realisation, you become much more active than the person who is active. They appear more active but there is more
strain because the idea that you are doing something is much more [inaudible]. Even when you are giving vibrations you say that
they are passing. They are flowing. When these are your hands, why don’t you say that I am giving, I am doing. That is [inaudible].
So the first dasha of thoughtless awareness which is crossed is that; between the thoughts, there is a [inaudible] gap through
which you can jump onto your unconscious being. Unconscious because it is not in the consciousness before. I do not mean the
unconscious state called devilry where you have no awareness of anything. That is another kind of mesmerism. So in the
thoughtless awareness, as soon as you arise, you get the collective consciousness. And the collective consciousness is
absolutely automatic. You become an automatic receiver of the knowledge of the Kundalini of that person. And your brain itself
becomes like the Kundalini of other people because you suddenly move into the Kundalini of others.
The fear about Kundalini must be given up. It is like fearing your own mother. If you know what is a mother, and her purity and
holiness. And if you remember Sita, the mother; her purity could not be spoiled by Ravana. The conception is not conceivable for
American minds – no, they cannot. They think it is foolishness, it is impossible – how can they have such a saint, like Christ? And
so many people in the modern age do not believe that women can be [inaudible/saints] and men can be [inaudible/devils]. Men
can be devils, it is possible; such useless fellows. Jet age – even if Rama comes, he will be considered absolutely useless, good
for nothing man; He cannot even look at other women.
This is what the dharma and adharma is completely confused. But confusion is needed for [inaudible/creation]. And confusion is
always welcome. In the mud, only, the lotus has to rise. I hope that after this lecture, you do not think it is just a lecture. But the
request of a Mother who has tried to approach you, through the loving words that please do not sink yourself but be yourself
through Sahaja Yoga. There is no other yoga that can work it out, I assure you. All other yogas take you to the sympathetic
nervous system.
Even a person like Buddha – he went round the whole world, did all sorts of renunciations and all that. Ultimately He got tired and
when He was lying at the feet of a tree, in that relaxed [inaudible] state, the all-pervading Mother just poured Her blessings on
Him and He got realisation. But now, it is possible for you to have mass realisation. In America, it has worked wonders, because I
told you so many sages who lived here in India are born there. And also very successful in Japan and in Germany. England, the
trouble is, people are still quite frigid. But I am sure the future generation will finish off all that is [inaudible]. But, in their finishing
off, they have gone to another extreme. They have gone to the [inaudible].
It is not what you do is important, it is not what you think is important. It is what you are.
Are you like a child within? Like, just like the lotus flower? A person who is very serious and does not get his realisation – I tell
him, “Go and see [inaudible] picture for one day”. It is true. You have to be a very light-hearted person. Does not mean foolish. But
just the play. Just seeing the play. Quiet, [inaudible]. I tell a joke that some people who were going by a plane were carrying the
luggage on their heads. And people asked why they were doing that. And they said, “We are trying to lighten the load on the
[inaudible/plane]. In the same way, we are very serious, maybe some [inaudible]. [Inaudible sentence]. The plane that is carrying
you is carrying the whole weight inside you. The one who has created the creation is looking after you is the [inaudible]. It
pulsates in your heart, is managing the whole show.
This dead work should not put another dead on your head. Just feel like a child. And do not sometimes assume a position where
you say you do all the work and put the whole fruits at the feet of the Lord. You cannot. On Gita also I am going to speak in my
Marathi lecture, where I am going to tell you what mistake we are committing about Gita. Gita is nothing but Sahaja Yoga. But
see diplomacy of Shri Krishna which has [inaudible/condensed] Sahaja Yoga, and here I am your Mother, I am telling you

everything.
The cart is not behind the horse; it is in the horse himself. So Krishna said if you do not listen to Me, just go on driving the cart.
Till you reach a point where you understand it is wrong to bring the horse in front. After realisation, if you read Gita, or Bible or
Koran, [inaudible] – even he was realised. He was a great man. You will realize we have not yet understood, so far, [inaudible/real
meaning] of these books. Nor we have understood about the “aakaar” (form), “nirakaar” (formless), the [inaudible] and the form.
The people who are worried about whether it is a form, or it is an abstract should know that it is both. The abstract which is in
[inaudible/conscious] expresses as the symbol which becomes the form. For example, at the Mooladhara chakra, chakra which
is the sex point; what you see is not the Kundalini but Shri Ganesh. What a beautiful child. Shri Ganesh is an eternal child. And by
bringing that symbol on the Mooladhara it is suggested that you have to become like a child when finding your Divine Mother.
But foolish people and some of the half [inaudible], saw the Ganesha – they only saw the trunk of the Ganesha which was coiled,
and they said, this is the Kundalini.
By doing this mistake they have accepted that the Kundalini is lying in their Mooladhara chakra. So the symbols that are not
abstract are also suggestive of the abstract – like the flowers are suggestive of the honey. But you have to be the bee; no use
talking about the flowers or the honey. In the modern age, the discovery was complete because I was bent upon it. First time in
my all lives, I have felt the need and I have worked it out. And I went to many people who claimed that they are disciples. Because
I never said a word. [Inaudible for two sentences].
And I found out this method of Sahaja Yoga, where the Kundalini rises in the centre and breaks your Sahasrara. Many people will
note that when you get realisation, you get a dilatation of the pupil, which is a sign of the parasympathetic nervous system.
Which you cannot get my mesmerism or any method but through the [inaudible] of the parasympathetic nervous system which
you cannot do. Humanly impossible to dilate somebody’s parasympathetic nervous system. This is a gross expression, but there
are many subtle expressions that [inaudible].
So I suggest you [inaudible for a few words] and do come for the meditation tomorrow. We are going to have meditations in
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. [Inaudible] lighten your psyche and try to lighten your being [inaudible, disturbance in tape for at least
one minute].
Can you [inaudible] in the masses? That is the jet age of which human beings are proud. But see where we have landed
ourselves. We are even selling our religion in the masses and we are trying to buy it. It was all right when some ignorant
brahmins were doing that. But now the intelligent are [inaudible]. Please try to come [inaudible] and later on the in Bharatiya
Vidya Bhavan. And those who are suffering from any diseases .. [End of recording].

1973-0325, On Paraloka
View online.
25 March 1973
On Paraloka
Public Program
Cowasji Jehangir Hall, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
PUBLIC PROGRAM DAY 3 JEHANGIR HALL MUMBAI 24-03-1973
We can throw some light on the awareness, as I have told you before,is by stopping its search at a point saying that, "We cannot
go any further". In our own being, we have got the negativity and the positivity as sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous
system. Even in the search of religion, when we start rising our attention towards this, we start searching it outside. This is not
because something wrong with us, but this has come to us through our evolutionary habits. For example, a fish came out and
became a reptile and started crawling. It felt the soil, the hardness of the soil and started walking. In the same way, every
evolutionary jumping has been by going out. But now the evolution has to be within, because the last stage of the complete
evolving of that instrument is built. Actually, it is now not the evolution, but involution that has to take place. For example, I take a
tape recorder from India to Singapore and start making it, preparing the instrument, and then, I come back on the same.
Recording all that has happened to you within yourself, it is the involution. With that, the awareness of every manifestation, which
was dead in the beginning, becomes apparent.
In the human being, when the ray of consciousness passes through the prism of this brain, it gets refracted and we get three
types of energies. Out of that, the sympathetic has got two; one is the right; another is the left. The left side of the sympathetic
nervous system of a man who is right-handed (now I will be only dealing with the right-handed man), is the storehouse of the
subconscious. Or I should say it is the plug through which we receive the intuition from our subconscious. The subconscious
half is the receiving house of all that is dead in our thoughts, in our memory, and all that is dead in the whole world. When we die,
really we do not die; most surprisingly, nothing dies. Only a very little part of our being recedes, manifested through the element
that is Earth, dies. Otherwise, we remain, in the atmosphere, in the Paraloka, as they call it, (in between the hell and the heaven,
you can say), in the paralok, where you can see them if you develop those eyes. They do exist.
Now, we are sitting down here, there is another world where we have to go, leaving these clothes here. Again, we come back to
this world, this Paraloka [collective subconscious], or we can say the world of the dead exists. The difference is, while we grow
here, there they become smaller and smaller till they reach a stage where they become a small, minute stick. They have got the
willpower to work out and manifest their unfinished ideas. Supposing, a doctor who has invented some great medicine and dies.
He might manifest on someone after selecting, and try to do good to people. In London, there is a very great organisation of
Doctor Lang who died long time back. And one day a soldier who was fighting on the battlefield suddenly felt that somebody had
entered his mind. When somebody is shocked, they can use that moment to enter the psyche – the psyche which is the
super-conscious. When he entered the body, he told the man that, “you should go and see my son who is in London and you tell
him that I will work inyour body as a medium”. So he went, and told the son, the son could not believe it. So, he told him many
secret things which the son did not know and also the things that nobody knew, but the son. This convinced the son and he
started a very big organisation of Doctor Lang. I have met many people who have been cured also by their help.
Now, when one doctor connects your Self to that Paraloka; (for example, if I have a connection with somebody in Los Angeles, I
can connect myself with other people who are there), you can ask some other doctors to come and help to cure to do good. This
is what is known as spiritual healing that we have in our mind. I have a disciple who was doing this kind of work for many years.
And, after about sixteen years of her doing, she started feeling very giddy, and she came to see Me. When I asked her to put her
hands towards Me, I found she had become very sick. So, I asked her, “What was the matter? Are you doing any spiritual
healing?”. Naturally, the first answer was, “How do you know, Mataji?” I said, “Forget it.” Then I had to tell her very frankly, “You

must get rid of this on your psyche”. She is the wisest person I have yet come across out of all those people who have been
working as mediums. She said, “Mataji, I just do not want it. Please remove all this. I just want the Supreme, the Param”. I said, “if
you want it, you will get it”. She got it, and she lost her power of spiritual healing due to which she used to shake her hand. And
She got the natural curative power and the awakening power, and she is one of the most dearest disciples of Mine. And one day
she will go very far in her healing, because of this [NOT CLEAR].
So, we have people who can do good, and they want to manifest through you. But, one must think why Doctor Lang did not come
on his own son? Because he did not want his own son to suffer in the long run. When anyone acts as medium, he is no good for
Sahaja Yoga. You are not independent.
First, you have to be completely independent of all these astral aspirations on you, and then only you can feel the beauty, the
glory, of your own being. A person who is in the shackles cannot be made the King and requested to take the throne.
In our country, we have had from ages, people working on the “mohini vidya” [hypnosis] and the “Paraloka vidya” [knowledge of
the dead]. And in America, I have seen people having witchcraft. One thing great about American people is that they are
absolutely honest. If they are doing witchcraft, they say we are doing witchcraft. They won’t take up another name and the witch
won’t call oneself a Devi. They won't do like that.
Now, this kind of working is, how it is worked out, is a very lengthy thing. But, I can tell you in a short way. As I have told you, the
libido, which contains all that is dead in you, all your subconscious mind, is connected with your solar plexus directly. In the same
way, the right-hand side and the left-hand side, both sympathetic nervous systems, are connected with your solar plexus, the
Manipur chakra, directly. Any doctor can guarantee that and can say that, if it is. But unluckily, the parasympathetic is hanging
above. The vagus nerve, which plays the most important part in carrying the Kundalini into the backbone, has a Void, between
the solar plexus [aortic plexus] and the vagus nerve. This Void has been described in the great systems of religion and people
have written books after books So as soon as your attention even goes to religion, you start growing on to your sympathetic
nervous system, either to the right or to the left.
By growing to the right side of the sympathetic nervous system, of course in the right-handed man, you go to the libido. Libido is
connected from sex point, up to the “muddha” (medulla oblongata?) that is the place below the brain, which touches your Agyna
chakra here. So, by doing any effort, you may get into that trap of getting into the libido – which is a connection already existing
between you, with yourself and the Parama.
The other side is the sympathetic nervous system which is waiting for you to act to any emergency. If there is any emergency, as
I told you yesterday if there is an irritation in the hand, it will start acting so much so, that it will overact, and a malignancy can be
created. See now both the things, how they are for your destruction.
Now, when you see people being mesmerised – those who are honest say that we are mesmerisers and we have this hypnotists
and all that, very honest people are there also in this world, everybody is not a cheat. So, they tell plainly that we are the people
who are going to hypnotise. When they hypnotise, you get suddenly submerged into your subconscious mind, the conscious
mind gets submerged into it, and you become unconscious to the outside world. And there you start acting according to the
demands of the person who is hypnotising you. Now, why do you do that? If he says you start jumping, you will start jumping. If
he says you start feeling sick, you start feeling giddy. If he says that you start counting one thousand, from one to one thousand,
you will start doing it.
There was a girl who was very anxious to go for a thing like that and she asked and I said, “Please do not go”. She would not
listen – she went there, and the gentleman asked her to count from one to one thousand. She was a very innocent girl, and I
knew what had happened to her. So, I went to see her just after that and I found that she had fainted. This is like, switching off
your mind – the conscious mind, with which you are listening to Me is just get switched off. You can also go to a subconscious.
Any movement towards sympathetic is against parasympathetic nervous system and against Kundalini. Ida and Pingala are the

two sympathetic nervous systems on which people have been working. And that is the reason they have never been able to get
their self-realisation. Because for parasympathetic nervous system, you must fill the Void with Divine Love. By mechanical
working, you cannot get to God, is a simple fact you must understand.
[Inaudible question or comment from a seeker].
Shri Mataji: I am happy you told me. Now, that we are connected with the libido through our efforts, when a person starts
weeping and crying for God, he might see that the garland from the deity is coming and garland himself. It’s quite possible. There
is nothing to be so much surprised. Depends on how much he is in connection with the paralok. There are so many saints who
are not realised, who have died and want to say that there is God. They can work it out. But if they are realised people they will
never enter into the psyche of those persons. They may give them certain indications like that. But, they will never enter the
psyche, if they are realised people because they have achieved their independence and they respect the independence of others.
Now, if you see the sympathetic nervous system, how it is worked out; you will be surprised, that the symptom of the
sympathetic nervous system is – you get more breathing, more pulse rate, more heartbeat and constriction of your intestine,
which leads to constipation and things like that. So, the mohini vidya, the way they learn it – first of all, they master the evil
geniuses who have died. If they come to know of someone who is an evil genius, such people who want to benefit by their evil
methods, wait for their death, and go into the “shmashanas” (funeral grounds) when they die. Because the dead – when they die,
the body remains, but the Atma hovers; at least for thirteen days. It does not take birth immediately. Some people take even five
hundred years because they are [inaudible].
So, that spirit which is hovering there is caught up by these people through their libido and they take away some part of that spirit
by removing a part of the dead matter. For example, they may take out the skull bone. They may even take the ashes of that (the
dead), because when the soul has to be reborn, he has to have that complete body. For that those ashes are required, and if
these ashes are kept in control by these people, then they (evil spirits) will be born with lame hands or lame legs and there will be
a problem. So, they go on hovering there and then, they (evil spirits) surrender themselves and accept their domination
completely.
Now, these people come out in the public and announce that we can show you miracles. They can, why not? Because, for us
miracles are something foolish. For example, a relation of Mine came and told Me that some sadhuji has given him a ring. I
laughed at him and said, “How many rings have you got?”. He is a very rich man. He said, “I have ten diamond rings”. I said, “He
has given you the eleventh ring. Did you go to ask for the ring?”. He said, “No, no, I went to ask him for something very divine”. I
said, “Then why did you accept this ring? You should have thrown out.” You should have told that I do not want this ring. “Why did
you accept?”. He said, ”All right, now I don’t care for it, but you do something about it”.
Now, these are the experiments we have carried out, you can also come and see. It is all open to you. It is a laboratory which is
open to all of you, to come and see with open mind. Not just to sneer and to laugh at. But to see, with understanding, to do good
to the whole humanity. So, I told him. He said that, “now You give me realisation”. I said, “I cannot”. He said, “Why?” I said, “you
will have to remove that ring”. He said, “I will not”. Then, I said, “I cannot give you the realisation”. Then when I started; I told him,
“all right, you put your hands towards Me”. And he started shaking. He said, “What is this? Why am I shaking?”. I said, “now you
take out the ring”. Immediately shaking stopped.
He said, “Throw this away”. I said, “You must know that ring you can buy in the market, but can you purchase the Divine in the
market? Why don’t you use your brain? You are a very intelligent man. What has happened to you?”
All such “miracles” are working. The other day, most surprising that it should happen at such a juncture when I was to speak on
the subject, that one gentleman, Mr Sharma from Punjab, came and was asking about Mataji. And some of my people were there
and they said, “What is the age of Mataji?. They said, “She is fifty”. “No, but I know of one Mataji who is four years old and she
calls herself something and all the [inaudible/cinema] people are after her. What about her, where is she?”.They said, “we do not
know”. He started making a lot of inquiries about her.

So they thought he is from CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) or what is he doing. Then they said, “Now, you come here
tomorrow for meditation and you will meet Mataji”. Somehow or other, I again came back here. And he saw me and said, “No, no,
no, no – this is not the Mataji I am talking about”.
Then he tells me, there was one boy, one gentleman who came to see Me and told him that, “you invest one thousand rupees or
one thousand five hundred rupees in this new venture. It is an enterprise. You please deposit this money with me. And I can
assure you, I will return you, double amount of it, within one month’s time”. He said, “How?” He said, ”I have a daughter who is
four-year-old and she is doing miracles”. He saw with his own eyes that she is taking out this and that from the air. Now the
four-year-old child cannot do anything positive, I mean consciously. But, the little child was picking out this; whatever you ask
her, she is doing like this and giving out like this.
So he was wonderstruck, and he gave the money; immediately forward with the money. Now the person has, he told Me that, “the
gentleman had disappeared and when I read the name Mataji, I came to inquire”. I said, “I do not need any money from you. But
thank God you are here. Tomorrow you come for your meditation. Perhaps one thousand five hundred is not such a great
amount. If you get your self-realisation, you are saved forever”.
Now, in my search to find out the method how to impart this awareness of Mine to others, I have been to several of these gurus.
Some of them I will try to describe, and now you use your brains and see what happens.
First of all, in my childhood, My father told me there is a sadhu/fakir who has come and who is doing some great miracles. So, I
went to see the gentleman. And what I found; he had a “chimta” (tongs) in his hands, you know chimta? There is no word for that
in English, I think. So he was using that hard thing to hit every person who came to him. Then I said, “What sort of a person he is
– I just cannot bear. It’s Impossible”.
Actually what he was doing was to hit the man, and put one devil on him, another devil on the other person. After some time, I
found people took out their rings, took out their everything and surrendered to him. I immediately put my hands towards him and
found out that he was a negative person. How do you make out a negative personality? That also I am going to tell. Very easy. I
must give you all the tricks.
Then I went to another person in Haridwar. He was doing wonderful miracles in my father-in-law’s place. As soon as he saw Me,
he started shivering. Absolutely shivering. He said, “Mother, Mother”. I said, “What are you doing?” He said, “I want to get rid of it.
Please save me from all this. I am now sick, I am absolutely finished, please save me from this”. I said, “Are you sure you are
finished with this?”. He said, “Yes”. You will be surprised; within five minutes he got rid of his maladies. And he got his realisation
later on, much later; about two years back.
In the same way, I went to Pune – there was one gentleman, a “mantrika” (tantric) who came to see Me. Same time. He was
staying with one Mr More and He told me that, “Mataji, now I am fed up of this. I have cured many people. But now my head is
very heavy and please save me from all this”. So I asked him, “Have you decided to give up all that forever?” He said, “Mataji,
save me in this life. I am not going to use that medium anymore. Now I can see that separately . In the beginning, I did not know
that it was a medium my guru had put on me. Now I am seeing it separately, I can see my guru also sometimes. But I cannot
sleep day and night”. I am having a terrible time. I said, “If you are sure, then you are going to get realisation. Don’t you worry”
And he got his realisation within five minutes. Surprisingly. Perhaps he was really fed up and he was very honest. I told him, “You
have lost all your power of seeing things, of telling things”. He used to tell the future, He could see things. He used to tell them
where has your father gone, where has your son lost. So he went out and told Mr. More that, “How is it possible, Mataji is saying
that, She has taken away all my siddhis. It is not possible. Because, I have done this for twenty-five years”. He said, “All right, then
you start your mantras”. Within five minutes he found out he had lost all his powers.

Then More told him, “Don’t you worry. Now, you have got the Divine quality . Be joyous and happy that this Divine is flowing, and
that you are doing it even without feeling that you are doing it. What a great joy – stand in your own dignity and independence,
and do not depend on this foolish material things which are going to die”.
But, the negativity which incarnates as rakshasas do not have one thing in them that we have – that is Love. They have no love
for anyone.
Then in the course of my search, I went to so many people. They said you become my disciple. I said, “All right. I will become
your disciple”. I went to one gentleman. He said, “You have to take sanyasa”. I said, “that I will not do”. He said, “Why?” I said,
“Because I am a sanyasini”. He said, “That is true. But still, You have to take the dress (ochre robes)”. I said, “I will not”. He said,
“Why”?.
I said, “it will hurt My Heart, it will hurt My family, it will hurt My mother, father, everyone. Why do you want Me to hurt them for
nothing at all?” So, he immediately started mesmerising Me with sympathy. He said, “But are You happy with Your husband? Is
he treating You all right?”. I said, “You do not know how he treats Me.” Then he started another trick, “Let him cry. Let him weep.
What is he going to do? After all, he will cry, weep and will be alright.”
I was surprised. That he could not even see the love I have for My husband, and the respect I have for him. The way he suggested
– I told him, “How dare you say such things against My husband whom I have known for twenty-five years now. And you want Me
to accept this nonsensical thing on my body, hurting all My family people. You have no love for mankind”.
There are people who go and threaten their parents that, “If you do not give us money, we will take to sanyas. We will die. We will
become nude”. It’s another way of expressing your shabbiness towards your parents. Our younger people if they think by
revolting against their parents and by hurting them and troubling them, they are becoming very beautiful – they should know that
that is not the way to do it. Those who cannot love their parents cannot love anybody in this whole world.
All the blessings of the world come through your parents only. Those who have denied their parents – of course, if the parents
are telling you something wrong, I can understand. But, you should not deliberately go and hurt them all the time. We have
examples of such children in this country – this great country of Mine; where their vibrations are everywhere. We have heard of
Shravan. The complete Vithala’s temple is built on the devotion of one person, is there.
These (negative) people teach you to revolt against all that is beautiful that God has given. This is the first way they hit you by
telling you against your parents, against your husband, against your wife, they want to break all your shackles.
This is not the way. Religion is based on Love.
And how do they do it? By putting these evil spirits on you. By which you bring money for them and surrender all that you have at
their feet. And they enjoy the luxuries of life. Even they are such foolish people. Why don’t they understand that there is no joy in
luxuries and in transitory fame?
There was another sadhuji who told Me that, “You were my wife in my last life”. I said, “Wonderful. I do not see that way about
you”. It’s a very common thing with many sadhus who handle women – you see, women are simple women. If somebody tells
them against their husbands, they feel, yes, yes, there is somebody who sympathises. With a little sympathy, you can win a
woman, poor thing. So he tells me You were my wife in my last life. I told him, “Sir, last life is dead and gone. If you are asking Me
to do something because you were My husband in My last life, what about the present one whom I have married? What do you
think of this one?” This made him very furious, of course. I said, “To Me, apart from My husband, all are My children including
you”.
Then, there are other ways of approaching people. It’s by taking advantage of their weak side. To mesmerise in such a way that

their subconscious automatically starts dominating them. First of all, you ask somebody to breathe heavily. As soon as you start
breathing heavily, you go onto the sympathetic trigger; is an automatic thing. And then immediately you mesmerise the person
with the devil. You give that person a necklace which has got a devil sitting on that. Now this devil goes home with that
gentleman and tells everything that is happening.
We had a lady in our group – in our own group, who was suffering already from astral trouble. She came to Me. In the beginning,
you see, I did not want to start this topic at all. Thanks to her, that now I am so open about it. She came to Me and she told Me,
“Mataji, I can see Your past”. I could find, first time, that there is a devil sitting on her. If not a devil, a saint. But you are not
independent.
Without realisation, if you are seeing anything, it is no good. First of all such a person ever gets – there are only two cases within
our group who got such a horrible “jagruti” (awakening) shaking and all that. Both of them were absolutely
[inaudible/innocent/intact/insect]. So she took up the courage into herself. And when I went away to America, she started telling
everybody – I am this. I am an incarnation of this, I am an incarnation of that. And what was she telling? Where is your son lost?
Where is your money lost?
And all the people who haverealisation from Me started losing their vibrations. They did not understand why it was happening.
Then one of them just thought, “is she realised?”. And when he tried found out she was not realised but she was giving them
past, terrible past. So he took up the whole thing into his hands and he told people that, “you must see what is the interest of the
Divine? Is the Divine interested in telling you what was your father? When you had so many fathers in your previous lives? Or
where did you lose your money or whether you are going to get money in the “satta” (card gambling)”? Such people are very good
at telling you the number of the horse. Not of the future, but they go and find out from the jockey, through their medium.
So this lady started doing this. And when I came back, I found most of my disciples had a heavy head. I said, “What have you
been doing?” And when I saw the lady, I found out Myself, within Myself, that she was very crudely handling the astral body by
beating them up with a stick. This is not possible for a self-realised person. Even to the greatest evil genius, they cannot. This,
like Krishna they may just kill the body, that is different, but they can never beat up the person. And all these astral bodies took a
revenge on her and they were all settled in her house. Now she started telling people what happened yesterday in your house,
what happened day before yesterday, who I was in the past and all that.
It can be to such a limit, that one of our sessions we had in Daadar, which many people have seen at least one hundred people
must have been there, that one maidservant, who was an ordinary Maharashtrian maidservant, had come for My darshan and
she started shaking, and the lady who was near her started shaking. So, I just caught hold of her hand and I asked her, “why are
you here”. She changed her tone and started speaking beautiful Marathi and using Sanskrit words. She said, “I am here for Your
darshan”.
All the people around started asking, “who is Mataji and why have you come for Her darshan”? You will be surprised she gave a
lecture in fifty shlokas all describing about Me and My past lives. I said, “will you go from this woman or not”. She said, “I have
come to sing Your praise and to let people know who You are”. I said, “you better not worry about that and you better go away
from here”. This is the truth in which people have seen. You will also see this. If you come to Me regularly, many things like this.
So when I told her that, “I do not need your help – you take your rebirth and come back and you take your realisation”, She
accepted. Since that day that lady is all right. She is perfectly all right.
My daughter’s ayah once in the night was going. So I told her, “not to go in the night, about 12 o’clock, these days the
atmosphere in the Bombay is very much spoiled by rakshasas”. She didn't believe Me, she went out and. next day My daughter
rang Me up and said, “Mummy, what to do, she is vomiting too much, and she is feeling terrible, and she is shaking her body”. I
said, “You ask her to put her hands towards the sea and call My name”. She got all right in five. And when she came back she
told me that “there are two persons who went out of my body and I saw You sitting there with a garland and all those things”.
So many psychological cases which doctors cannot cure or most of the incurable diseases are because of astral aspirations.

And the more you allow these rakshasas to continue their work in this great city of Mumbadevi, of Mahalaxmi, there are more
chances of getting these people let out free to harm your children.
There is another Babaji who puts people into trance. He makes the people starve for two weeks. Now if there is somebody who
is non-vegetarian. He says you must strictly stick to vegetarian, You must take only to curd. Now the person is weak, and
certainly he puts mesmerism on that, and another devil is put onto that, and this person starts shaking and says I have got the
vibrations.
But in Nasik, one of his disciples was very courageous and she told Me, “Mataji, though he says these are divine, I don’t believe
him. Because I don’t eat fats, I get a terrible headache, and there is no place of any joy within myself which Your disciples are
enjoying”.
There is another type who puts the devil through this – the ones who put through this Manipur chakra are of course, much more
dangerous. Because they give you to eat some ashes; the bhoot goes inside. You eat the ashes with difficulty. Such people have
given burning on the hand, so much so that they have developed blisters on their hand. Our Patanjali [inaudible/Sethi?] who has
written an article on him has himself burnt his hand. There are so many who can tell you about this.
So the mesmerism, very genuinely granted by these people, only helps them to accumulate wealth. Now this gentleman was in
America when I was there. So one day I went to see a public garden, where they were so many of his disciples were distributing
the handbills and all. So, I asked Chandubhai to collect some of them and I would like to see. So Chandubhai, who is an expert
now, he said, “Mataji, all their Agnya chakras are turning in the opposite direction”. If there is any lunatic person, if you see any
lunatic person, if you are realised, you will know how to know the Agyna chakra’s movement, you will find, all the lunatics have
their Agnya chakras turning in the opposite direction.
Nothing has happened to the Kundalini, but the chakra is moved on the sympathetic side, through which the libido is contacted,
and you are dominated by a bhoot. So I took aside one gentleman. He said, “No, I am already spoiled by him. He has given me a
thing here which I must have every day”. And the fellow was absolutely nervous and perspiring immediately.
This gentleman, I believe, later on, collected so much money in America, poor Americans, I tell you, sometimes I feel so sorry
because they are very genuine people. He has taken away even the last pie of so many of people from there and has brought
them here like mad people, they are washing his clothes, they are washing his feet, they are doing everything.
How can a man who is spiritually alert have so much attention towards his food, his clothes, his belongings, his possessions?
Except for the beauty aspect of the matter, the rest is all useless. Is a headache. It is headache to have many things. But, you
cannot tell the people who are mesmerised. If you tell them, they just walk off. They won't listen, do nothing, will be deaf. It’s a
sign of a temperament which refuses everything that is positive. “Oh, hum to kush hain, hum anand mein hain” – we are very
happy, we are in joy.
There are some gurus who put you into trance for six-seven hours. What is all this nonsense going? Is it possible to be only in
trans for seven hours and later on you could be you? Your normal self? No. If you are realised, you are realised forever. For every
moment you are realised and that time, all the time you are meditative.
There is not a single moment when you are not collectively conscious. Supposing one these people if they are travelling by train,
suddenly they find heaviness; a person standing in front has got his Kundalini up there. We had a nice music party in Bordi ,
where two-three people had come. And when the musicians started singing, their Kundalini rose up. Of course, I was not there
for the realisation, but their Kundalini rose up.
And it became very heavy because they had some astral sitting on them. And they didn’t know that they started looking like that
and they started shaking. And they couldn’t understand. It is sometimes so comical. The way people start acting. Because the
bhoots and the devils have no sense of decency in them. They even hover around small children. They make you so slavish

towards them that you start behaving in the most obnoxious manner.
Imagine, a good girl from a good family becoming naked – and her photos being sold in America at a very high price. People say
that it is better to see a cabaret dance for free like this, than to pay so much for a cabaret dance in a bar. Is it dharma by any
chance, you just think it over. What has happened to your brains?
Now these rakshasas, if I describe, you will be shocked how they behave. And in this Kaliyuga, how can they come, as Ravana or
Mahishasura they came here. Ravana was a very powerful preacher and had a very big library of his own. And with his speech he
used to mesmerise the people such a lot that they used to go into horrible states. He had that power within. And when Sita would
not allow him to come close to Her, he could not; because of Her holiness and chastity. And Her divine powers. He used to
threaten Her that in my next life I will come and destroy the chastity of every woman of Your country.
All this; Mahishasura when murdered and killed, by his own deeds, by Mother Kali, has promised all his people who were killed
that let me reborn in the Kaliyuga and I will see this Kali Mai, then I will stop Her.
Even Putana, who became a very fat person while sucking the breast by Krishna, she has come here to divide you, to direct you,
and to take you to this path of sins.
Holika, who was burnt because of her vicious mind, who tried to kill Prahalad, is again back in this Kali Yuga which you will find.
As I told you, there is a lady; if you touch her, she falls on the ground. So they asked, “What is it”. They said, “She is so holy that
you cannot touch her”. If the Ganges river becomes like that, God saves the sinners. That if you touch somebody, that person has
to fall down.
The other day I met somebody who asked Me about My opinion about a particular lady. I did not want to say much. I said, “All
right, she is there but she is just talking about bhakti. That is in separation”. Because I did not want to say anything so directly at
that time. The same gentleman, whose son got Realisation, went to see the lady. Where he found that the disciples didn’t have
any 'jagruti'. They can make out, even you can make out. So he said that, “How is it, for twenty-five years you have been with this
lady, and you haven't been given jagruti?” So, he tried to give them jagruti. Because they were having the astral on their head, they
got it with a real shake. Those who get it with a shake, means that.
So they went and told her that, “What is this? For twenty-five years you have wasted our lives?”. So she said, “All right. Call that
boy here”. And the boy was called, and she just looked into his eyes. The boy was Realised but only up to the thoughtless
awareness, not beyond. You have to go beyond – into doubtless awareness, then only you can avoid all these astral troubles
completely. But, with thoughtless awareness also, you can make it out that there is an astral problem on us, and we should
remove it. We can remove it. But we can see that, and we can remove it.
So this boy got that trouble and he started vomiting. Naturally, you see, when a person is spiritually evolved, he cannot tolerate
anything negative in him. He started vomiting out whatever he had. And when he came home, he was about to die. Luckily, I
came from America. Immediately I know who was the person who has done the trick. Because I knew all of them, one by one. I
know all their tricks. And I am all alone, still, I am going to save them with love.
Because Love has the power to engulf all that is negative like a light has the power to give up all that is dark. But the darkness
may disappear into nooks and corners and hide itself. And again may surface. So you are there to find it out wherever there is
darkness. And see to it that they are all destroyed in this Kali Yuga so that complete Satya Yuga dawn upon us. It is now for you,
the intelligent and the elite and the modern, to see to it for yourself and find out what I am saying you is true or not.
I can show you with my own experiments and the experiments they have carried out, which they have described in the book,
which please you should purchase and see what is written in that. You come and see those people, the horrible things they are
doing. Naturally, the one question that can be asked very intelligently and I accept it that. “You might also be mesmerising
people”. Yes, of course. “Or You may be Yourself an incarnation of some rakshasi”. Yes, possible. Now how to explain?

As I have told you, that the libido is in the sympathetic nervous system. And with that sympathetic nervous system, the eyelid
gets completely relaxed, the complete body feels relaxed and complete being feels absolutely, absolute. With the
parasympathetic, the first thing, it helps is the cancer, because cancer is the outcome of the sympathetic. But the greatest sign
of the parasympathetic acting on you is that, when you have closed your eyes, the parasympathetic is excited by some Divine
force then the eyelids become completely and in the eye, the pupil becomes completely dilated black.
My children should have eyes like Mine. Otherwise, how am I to know, so many children I have, thousands. And according to
Yoga-Shastras, the Sahasrara, this portion is Brahmarandra, the fontanelle bone, here are the Peethas. Those who get realisation
can check their bone here, and the whole of this portion might also become soft, like a [inaudible] going around. At the back also
you will find the softness, sometimes it comes down so much, that sometime it is difficult to describe. But there is nothing to
describe. It starts pulsating. This you cannot do through mesmerism. This is just this level [inaudible]; inside – I am not telling
you.
So, there is another question which was asked. Of course, they thought it was very wise and I think it is a great help, that, “when
we put hands to You, we burn. But when Your disciples put hands to us, they burn. Now, who is positive and who is the negative”?
It is a complicated question. So for that, we have to use a person who is lunatic. Absolute accepted lunatic or psychologically
affected person. Ask that person to put the hands to Me or to My photograph and raise the Kundalini, he will start shaking so
much. Now, you ask a realised person to put his hands and go into meditation, , while a person who is suffering from negativity
will start shaking and burning. The one who is a certified person and a negative personality, the one who suffers from inferiority
complexes and the fear and all these symptoms of negativity, should be used as a [inaudible]. Gone.
One gentleman wanted to take full advantage of My [inaudible]. He took my photograph and all that and he also said he was My
disciple; very openly. Of course, I accepted that, “You be My guru if you can give Me something sensible. And then I got
something, he said you must let me say that I am your guru. I said if you want I will tell them, but I do not think you have done
anything unique. Even now he is [inaudible/paying] for it. He is telling people he is doing My work; if so, accepted. If so, then
those people when they come to Me then how is it that his disciples, when they come to Me, it is impossible to give them even
jagruti?
Anyone of these gurus, if they are doing the work of the Divine, then how is it in Sahaja Yoga, they are complete failures? While
the innocent children are the first to get it. If somebody has got jagruti, at this moment you get a jagruti, it is done by bhoot. Such
gurus spoil the Kundalini to such an extent; see I have got people of such gurus for three years, poor things, I feel sorry that the
capacity to grow is lost in their spirits (inaudible). It breaks my complete being and shatters Me sometimes the way I see My
children have been spoiled. Their Kundalini has been hit by these thugs.
If they want to earn the money, let them earn. [Inaudible sentence]. Even if they want to use the name of dharma, let them – after
all, the name of dharma is not going to get spoiled by them. Doesn’t matter. But why play with the Kundalini? And spoil these
people permanently. And make devils out of them for their next life and next life and next life. Just for your own publicity, you
want to do it. Because there is no love. Because you think of the transient thing that is money and the public.
You have no love for My children,who has been seeking love for ages and at this juncture when they came to seek Me, they have
taken this poison. This poison acts, but still, as I told you, that love is like the bottom of the sea and the complete effort of sea to
become bigger than the bottom cannot be [inaudible].
That’s why I say no use killing these people now anymore. Finished. They come back. It’s better to transform them, and put some
life of love. They talk of love, they talk of religion, they talk of all the great truths that are written down. In every religion you will
find such people going around, and earning something out of it for money.

You have to have the other brain which wants to have the real Self . I want you to not to believe Me at all; not to have that blind
faith and not to surrender yourself, your beautiful being to Me who is nothing but just a person before you get your Realisation. I
am just like you before you get your Realisation. When you come to Me, at the most it is like you go to the temple, put your hands
in the [inaudible] and do not get any vibrations.
But once you are Realised, then not only I but all the temples have a meaning. All the religions have a meaning. All these books
have a meaning. That is why, first of all, get the realisation. With Realisation, you not only develop a creative power because it is
love, but also awakening power and also the Realisation power you have to have. Because I am in the city perhaps, that’s why my
disciples have not been able to give Realisation. But the day I go from Bombay I am sure they are all going to rise higher and
higher.
And for a Mother, the greatest pride, the day she sees her own children rising in their glory.
Thank you very much.
[Applause. End of recording]

1973-0715, Guru Purnima: Sahaja Yoga a New Discovery
View online.
15 July 1973
Guru Puja
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Guru Purnima Puja. Mumbay (India), 15 July 1973.
Dear People,
Sahaja Yoga is a New Discovery. In reality how does the discovery take place for that which is placed, that which is? Just as
Columbus had started a journey to find India, then was India not there? If it was not there then what would he be finding? Sahaja
has been there from before. It has been found out only now. Sahaja Yoga is the own way of the Supreme Essence. This is the
way of the natures own method. This is the only way where mankind can through evolution be taken to that dimension, by which
mankind can be acquainted with that consciousness, can be absorbed with that consciousness, by the support of which this
entire creation and the heart of man is moving. Much has been written about this.
From ancient times the seeking for it has been going on. Man is seeking something all the time; whether he is seeking after
money, or whether he is seeking after power, or he seeks after love; he is running after one or another seeking. But what is the
thirst behind that seeking, he perhaps does not know. Behind this is only the seeking after Bliss. In his search after happiness he
thinks that if he collects a lot of wealth he can be happy. But there are many countries that have attained and gained a lot of
wealth and are extremely unhappy. Thousands are killing themselves.
Behind all this seeking is the thirst for Joy which is dragging you towards this unknown . When man after seeking everywhere
can find no happiness then he turns towards Dharma. And even when he turns towards Dharma he is seeking outside. The
reason for this is that what he himself is he has lost. He is ignorant and that is why man runs from himself. Each moment he is
running from himself. He cannot sit with himself for even two minutes. If he is told to sit with himself for two minutes he says ‘O
God what punishment is this for me’. What we call boredom nowadays.
Why is man so fed up of himself? Why is man running away so fast from himself? Because he is ignorant about his own self. He
is ignorant about his own beauty, his own knowledge, his own glory, his own love and is running outwards in the search of
happiness. Joy is not outside. It is within. It is within you. People say you are in the form of God. Just by talking about it, it is not
going to happen. In Marathi they say,” Bolachach bhat bolachich kadhi” (Only making promises but not fulfilling them).
Whether I say that you seek the Formless or Formed, but these are only words. Thousands of discussions have been done,
crores of books have been written, how many lives were destroyed, but there is no end to a man’s thinking.
Whatever man thinks with his mind, he does so in the limitations of the mind. That which is beyond the mind and cannot be
understood by the mind….. Even this lecture of mine is only a talk, and by this talk you cannot know that Divine. Whatever I go on
talking it will all become like a weight on your mind. If I say that keep a weight then that too will become a weight. God has
created such an arrangement that whatever we do with our mind will become heavy like a weight. And being trapped under that
weight we cannot fly where we have to go. That is why seeking has always remained incomplete.
But now I am going to tell you about the New Creation. Not only a talk, but also its discovery which has been found out. In the
path of revolution such has been happening, that any person who goes into the expertise of anything he sinks, and finishes off.
In the same way it is happening to humans. There is so much competition and opposition going on, that man has made his brain
so specialist that his brain is bursting.

Now a new type of man is needed that can know this Power beyond the mind. This power which moves this mind also makes the
heart beat. To know that Power you can talk all you want, or try all you want, you cannot reach there. This is without any doubt. It
is not written anywhere about which I am talking. I am not saying anything very special. You can read Nanaka, Kabirdas, you read
Vaishista, read about the guru of gurus Janak. Not only in our country but also in the foreign countries they have been writing like
this for thousands of years. They have all been writing about which I am talking. “What you have to get is unexpectedly within.”
But those poor things just kept saying. Maybe because they could not search it. If they were not able to find out about it, it does
not mean that they were any less. If Columbus was not able to find India it does not mean that he was any less. And later those
people who found it, they did not do it to belittle the ones who could not. This is not a collective search. You all think separately,
so the thought comes to many that Mataji is talking something different. No.
I am telling you about all the searching of all the searches. Until now man has born tremendous hardships to put their attention
on this. Take the psychologists, biologists and the big scientists. Many of them and even the realized souls got it to a certain
extent but were not able to give.
The reason is time. For God, time is timeless. We are the ones who think that some are left behind and some have moved
forward. The ones who have died are great. Who has died, I want to ask? Nobody dies. All those who die sit in the other world
and then come back here, and then go back to the other world and come back again. From the animals some become humans,
but mostly people go to the other world and back again to this world. It is only a coming and going. No one dies.
So it can happen that from some of you who are sitting here, are also because of your seeking from many life times and you can
get it. If you can get it then why should there be such a discussion about it. It is such an ordinary thing and I find it really odd. It is
really odd that people make an issue about everything. A mother is giving you food to eat but by making an argument about it
how will it happen? It is not an argument. This is the Truth. This is the Truth. It is a very great seeking. The ones who are realized
who are sitting here, understand it.
In the search for Dharma man has only been able to reach the other world. Till now he has not reached the Supreme. And the
ones who did reach the Eternal were unable to bring down the Supreme. This is very important for others. Because just as you
have had many rebirths so do I have many births. And I too have had a very close relationship with all these great seekers. And
these are so near to me and mine. Perhaps they are not so near to you. All those who carry big flags, that we are Muslims or
Hindus or this or that, only carry a false certificate and have no guarantee that in their past lives the one who was a Hindu was a
Muslim and the one who was a Muslim might have been a Christian. Now if it is a question of births and rebirths, a question of
joy, then one should think on that level.
That level is such that whatever is Eternal is not gross. Whatever is the Eternal Essence is not gross. That which is sucking is not
growth. That which is subtle is not gross. Please understand this properly. It can be enlightened in the gross but the Eternal is
not interested in the gross.
Like many people tell me that many sadhus and saints ask God for something and God gives it to them. But God has not given it,
this much I can say. God is not interested that how many children you have, that you get lands, houses, and the world’s pleasures
and leisure. God is not interested in this at all. We have made a big mistake in understanding God. The Eternal Essence is only
interested in giving the Eternal, please remember and write this down. And people talk also that this Eternal or Supreme Essence
is only got through the Kundalini yoga. Many wrote about this too.
But with Kundalini Yoga you get only Siddhis (Spiritual Powers), has never been written anywhere. Yes, but those who have got
the powers have never written that the powers should come through the Kundalini. Kundalini is your mother. She is sitting inside
you to give you your second birth. She is only going to give you your second birth. She is not the foolish mother who will give you
powers and throw you into the other world. The amount of understanding you have, She is many times more wise, and more
loving. She is not going to push you into a wrong place. She is not the evil mother who will push you into Untruth. Till such time

as with the Union of the Kundalini one does not get the recognition, till then the Kundalini is not a union Yoga, and that is what
Sahaja Yoga is.
And God has made such a beautiful arrangement of this within us, is a point to understand. When a child comes into the body of
the mother then with the gross elements his mind, brain, attention, ego is all made. But when the light comes in, it descends from
the fontanel bone area in our brain which is shaped like a prism, through this very area the energy (Shakti) gets divided into three
parts. God has done this so cleverly. If someone is a doctor here he can understand. We call this the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system.
In our bodies are there two (Shaktis) energies present about which we know very little, and about which we find it very difficult to
find out specially about the para-sympathetic nervous system. In our Hindu Yoga Science these are called as Ida, Pingala and
Sushumna. Ida and Pingala are the subtle of the sympathetic nervous systems in our body, means that the gross (jad) of these
two is the sympathetic nervous system.
Think about it like this that God fills the petrol from the top of our head in us, and when filling the petrol a descent happens that
the rays which pass through the prism and then deflect, and then it goes down and makes two Nadis called as Ida and Pingala.
And the one which is at the top of the head descends down the center and becomes your Kundalini and goes into the triangular
bone at the base of the spine and settles in there.
One thing is proved that our Kundalini is sitting in such a place which has no connection with sex. If you read books they say that
by awakening the Kundalini such and such happens. But the ones who raise the Kundalini, who I have met and known, they all
take you into the sympathetic and do not raise it through the Sushumna. If anyone is a doctor here will understand that
parasympathetic nervous is the Sushumna which is in the center, and recognition of it is that when the Kundalini rises then the
eyes dilate.
This is an outward recognition. Ask any doctor that when the parasympathetic nervous system is activated, then the eyes dilate.
And we can show you outwardly if your eyes are open to see, because one has to give a proof about each and everything
otherwise you cant understand. There is a proof of this that which you can see the pulsation of the Kundalini at full strength at
the base of the spine.
You know that there is no pulsation at the base of the spine. We can show you that there is a pulsation at the base of the spine
and slowly this pulsation rises upwards, and with this at some places it pulsates more. These are our centers. You can be shown
this and you can see its movement. When the Kundalini will rise through the Sushumna only then can you get realization. But for
this, one does not know why a very strong condition has been put by God.
There is a very great stoppage here which you will have to give. It is this that when the Kundalini will come on Sushumna only
then God’s Infinite Love will come into that man. Till that Love does not come down into man the Kundalini will not rise, no
matter what you do. She can be annoyed or angry, but she will never rise till the Infinite Love will come into Sushumna where a
special place has been made. This place is made between our Nabhi chakra and Anahata Chakra. Till this Love does not come
down till then the flow from the Sushumna will not rise.
For example there are two ladders, and in the middle is another ladder and there is a gap between us and that ladder, and you are
not able to cross this gap in any way. There is no bridge by which you can cross it. The two stairs Ida and Pingala are down at the
level of the ground, which is the left and right of the sympathetic nervous systems.
The central stair is hanging in the middle which will take you to the Supreme. If there is any psychologist he can understand
about the two stairs of the sympathetic systems. The one on the left side takes you to your ego. And the one that is on the right
hand side takes you to the super ego. These two together spread onto our forehead, like a balloon and then they join together at
the top of the head. Sometimes they come and spread onto the whole head.

Sometimes the super-ego is very strong and sometimes the ego. The one that is stronger is spread on our brain. They then close
the path of the middle ladder. Now the petrol which had been made by the parasympathetic system, and filled with the Kundalini,
its path and flow has stopped. Now we are separate. Now we have become the Self and we feel that we are an individual. Now
the ego started, that We Are. Now this is the reason for running away from ourselves, because we do not know ourselves who we
are. You are listening to me by putting your attention towards me but I cannot put my attention on you.
If I say put your attention on yourself then you cannot do that because you have been cut off from that source which you are.
One which is the super ego, a lot of weight keeps accumulating. Every type of weight; a weight in which we are taught, do this,
don’t do that, don’t go here, don’t eat this or that. Or we give big lectures to people that you must be an Indian, or Japanese. Or
you must hate so and so, or we are Hindus , Muslims or Christians, by all these, what we call, conditionings or weight the super
ego gets weighed down. And that which is the ego says we are so and so, we should do this.
The one that says Don’t Do is the super ego and the one that says Do is the ego. In reality neither do we not do or do. The Doer is
someone else. It is a useless thinking. The One who is Doer does what has to be done and will do. But this grossness is within us
that we use that petrol, by our Ida and Pingala and we condition ourselves with that and put it under a weight. In the center is the
Sushumna Nadi.
Now many people have said to me that Mataji you talk against this one or that one. I am not talking against anyone. But you have
climbed the wrong ladder; I will have to make you come down that. Because I have to make you climb the middle ladder. So
whom am I opposing I don’t understand? What am I going to gain by opposing anyone? I am just telling you that you have
climbed the wrong ladder, and all will come down. I go to meet the big and great Gurus and talk to them that what are you doing?
By doing all this you cannot get God. You must understand by doing all this you will not get God.
What I am saying? Read Vaishista, or Adi Shankaracharya, because it is a historical thing. They have said the same thing that you
get to God you cannot do anything. But there is a slight difference between them and me that they had said that are very few who
have the authority to get to God. Some should remain in bhakti and others should do some yogas so that they can keep their
discipline. But they also said that a disciplined mind or a mind that is running after indulgences, both minds are useless for
ascent.
One has to have a mind like a small child which is without sin, and is innocent. Such a one has the right to attain God. This is
what they have clearly said. But who reads them? The question is that we read a lot and we read about those who know nothing
about Dharma. And even if they know it is just a little bit. The ones who think they are very great Hindus they must first read Adi
Shankaracharya. Adi Shankaracharya had established the Hindu Dharma. Then why not read Adi Shankaracharya? You read all
the books of the world, but why don’t you read him and know him? The difference between what he said and I say is that he said
that in crores there are just one or two and I say in crores there are lakhs.
This is not of a question of being hopeful but a question of time. The time will come. The time of Kalyuga is a time of a very
terrific battle. It is a time of total darkness. You don’t know this as you are seeing me. Besides yourself you are not being able to
see anything else, but those who are realized know that what a pledge has been tied. Negativite and positive forces are both
tying their force. There is the full force of sympathetic and Parasympathetic. The sympathetic is sucking away the
Parasympathetic. But no matter how much the sympathetic sucks it out; if that Parasympathetic becomes one with that Ananda
then this will go on filling it up.
You can go on using up the petrol but if that petrol is connected to the petrol pump and what is there to be afraid of. This is all
due to the sympathetic. The active consciousness side of the sympathetic, from where you do all your work, from where you
spend your energy if that is over spent then a disease like cancer sets in. And if the Superego is over used then madness comes
in. I do not cure people’s diseases. To say that I cure people’s diseases is a wrong concept. Because the parasympathetic
system cools down the sympathetic system by which a person gets cured.

If there is some madness then that too will get cured. And if within you a disease like cancer sets in, due to over activity that too
will get cured. The cure for cancer is only Sahaja Yoga and there is no other cure in the world for it. This point will be proved. I
know that this will be proved with time that many have been cured of cancer. The people who are sitting here can also tell you.
One point I have been making from the beginning is that where is our attention? Is our attention on that cancer which is
destroying our body which is gross or is our attention on the consciousness (Chaitanya)? Then we should think about
consciousness. Till we do not keep our attention on Consciousness then the gross ( material) will also trouble us. The whole
work is by consciousness ; grossness (material) has no work in this. We have got so used to the gross and material that man
gets stuck on to little, little gross topics. One person used to come who got realization and started giving it to others quite well.
But realization doesn’t mean that you got busy. You are reborn and you have become like a child again.
Now you have to grow further. But the attention is on “My son should get alright, my children should become alright, my husband
should get alright.” Then after some time “My money problems should become alright.” Where is the attention? You have
become realized but the attention is exactly where you left it. The one who has kept his attention on consciousness/Chaitanya
such a person has risen very high. Sitting among you, are people who are very high. They are like the gods and worthy of
reverence. These people should be called gods who have been reborn. There is no need to fight with people who talk useless
things. Those who want to come should come and those who don’t want to come should not come. There is no time left to argue
and have discussions with them, because such people will go on discussing and arguing. As Adi Shankaracharya has said that
low level people should keep their minds disciplined and somehow live properly and protect themselves from becoming thieves
etc. They should live like good citizens. But the ones who have their attention on the Supreme, will not be satisfied with such
things.
Till you have not attained the Supreme you should not have any belief in me too. There is no need of pretence. Whatever anyone
tells you, you should not believe it, but first get it within yourself, then only have belief in me. I am not here to open a shop or earn
money or make a name for myself. I am here only to transform human beings. If not in this birth then I will see in the next life. I
am used to living in the Eternal. But one should now think that the ones who have died, have died. Don’t take their topics and
repeat them. Put your attention on yourself. Maybe it might be that one of them is you who had written about it in your past lives.
Can be that you are the very great people who had written and have been reborn and come here today to take get your right.
What has happened is gone.
In Sahaja a seeker has to do nothing. The one who is drowning in the water, if he does nothing it is better. But he saves the
others who are drowning. This is an easy way to explain Sahaja Yoga. Those who are in their source, those who have got their
realization, those who have become one with their Shakti/ Power, they will do everything. The rest who have not realization
should sit peacefully. They will come onto your source/sutra and give you love. They will come onto your source/sutra and heal
your chakras because you do not know your chakras as yet.
When you get your realization then you will understand what I am saying, that yes, here is this chakra, it is moving, that chakra is
moving like that in another. Then only will you understand what is the collective consciousness. The ones who keep no, no right
from the beginning, this is not the place for them and neither is there any arrangement for them. But such people no matter how
conditioned they are, but who want that a transformation should come within them, such are dear to me and I have full faith that
they will get it in this lifetime, despite what the conditioning is and despite how their Kundalini has been played around with. If I
say that someone’s life is getting destroyed then people are opposing me is really madness.
If a mother sees that there is something wrong with a child, and she corrects that then …. In your simplicity and innocence
something has been spoiled within and I am here to correct it. But to think such things from beforehand only, what is so sensible
about this? What kind of demand is this?
Today is Guru Purnima, and I have to explain Sahaja Yoga fully to you. It is not possible in such a short time. I wanted to talk on
many things but this subject is very comprehensive. And in many of the meditation classes I have told people that those who are

realized have reached such a stage that they can understand it. Because from their hands the vibrations of Joy are flowing;
those vibrations of Love are flowing by which they can understand what collective consciousness is. One must understand that
what is this ?
There maybe many people among you who feel your hands are shaking or getting hot when you put your hands towards me. You
might feel so. So people may say we are getting vibrations. These are not vibrations. That is because you are opposing me.
Something within you is opposing me. The love that I am giving you your hands are shaking because of your opposition. I believe
the vibrations come when your Sahasrara starts moving.
Kabirdas has said “On the Top of the head the anahata (the unheard sound) beats.” It means that just like the beating of heart
the same happens at the top of the head. When the noise of this breaks and pierces then you become one with God, then no
noise comes nor do you see anything,nor is anything visible. Many people tell me that they have Divine Visions, divine this or
that. What are you going to get with visions? If you were to get all, by having visions, then why this seeking? It is beyond vision or
hearing with the ear. It has to be known from within. The one who has known it from within, can only understand it.
With vision many see many big, big miracles. Many people see pictures, and many people tell me that he has miracles. I say, my
son, God is beyond this. It is an experience. Leave all this. By leaving all this and when you will come into Nirakara/Formless then
you will get the Oneness with God, and then you will find the meaning of things that are Sakara/Formed.
Many have been cured by these Joy giving vibrations. Diseases have got cured. But the greatest thing that has happened and
that which has given me the greatest pleasure is that ten people have got their realization collectively. Now you will ask me how
they got their realization so fast. Many don’t get their realization so fast. They have been coming since four years to me. Many
ministers, governors, others, they don’t get their realization then what can I do? I don’t have to take money from them that you
give me 2000 rupees and I will give you a certificate that you are realized. If it has not happened then it has not happened and if it
has so it has.
I had gone to America and there is one gentleman who is a big king, who was with me. He said “Mataji, whoever comes, you give
them realization but you don’t give me. What have I done?” I said,” Son, I wont say anything to you because you will be upset. You
have heard so many lectures on Dharma , but have you yourself ever established Dharma within you? Day and night you are
killing yourself is for what? Just think, leave all this to God” Four days passed and he said, “I believe you. I went to India and all
the people told me that you are realized. So do our work and give me money and they gave me certificates”. I said, “All this does
not work on here, what can I do?” Because what is going to happen will happen; no amount of recommendation or cleverness of
anyone will work. It is so ultra modern that nothing will happen. What will be, will be and what will not be, will not be. Now if it
doesn’t happen such people get upset and start talking against me. What can I do if it does not happen. I want that you all should
get it. Night and day I am working so hard so that you all get it. But if you do not get it then what can I do? It is your blockage.
To cure diseases is not the work of Sahaja Yoga. You must know this, because many people say that so and so has cured them.
What? What have they cured? Sahaja Yoga is the science of awakening the Kundalini and to get to God and nothing. And don’t
associate all this with the gross; because there are thousands of diseases. You must have heard of Dr Lang a very big doctor in
London who suddenly died. His dead spirit got inside the superego of a soldier in Vietnam and started telling him to come with
him to his son’s house in London. When they arrived he told him to tell his son that I have come inside your body. The son did not
believe him. Then this soldier told him all the secret talks the father had with him. So the son started believing him. Then he told
the son to help him to start his practice again. He said that in the other world there are many doctors who want to manifest. They
have a very big international organization. Are they true people? It is an untruth. They do not give the name of God they say it is
this way. And if you write to them they say that at 10 o’clock a man will come and do something and you just relax. And right at
that time you feel that something or someone has come within you and you have got alright. But they have cured only the body
and have not got the Param Tattwa/Supreme Essence.
This body will get left behind here and then one will go there and come back again. And on whom such practices are being done,
they do not know, they are also innocent , that the very spirits they are using for their work will one day come onto them. Dr Lang

must have known this otherwise why did he not enter his son? He can go into a soldier. And the body of spirits is not gross like
ours that is why he can see much more than us. This is what is called ESP or psychology or what you call the Pentacostals,
blessings of the Atma/Soul, where a person jumps, screams, yells, mesmerism.
This is all the work of spirits. From these many are good spirits and many are extremely evil. Just as we are so, are the spirits.
Some are rakshasas and devils. Today you are not seeing them but I might show them to you later, just as today you can see the
rising of the Kundalini. They are there. You can see their reality their behavior. In every religion they have been written about. In
the Hindus the Sura and Asuras have been written about. What is, is. When you will talk of the positive and the negative will have
to be shown to you. Just to talk of Dharma and Adharma is just a talk. Just to talk only of dharma, then how can it be? There is
Dharma and adharma. What is dharma cannot be adharma and what is adharma cannot be dharma. This confusion has been
made somewhere but this is not true.
What is negative is negative and what is positive is positive. One should understand the negative. Negative means that which is
dead, which is sitting in the sympathetic. And the effect of that negative is more where it is very gross like the city of Bombay.
We are very gross in this city of Bombay. Day and night there is the sound of money, the flags of elections. Night and day the
attention is stuck in all these things. Man‘s attention does not go beyond this. There is no enquiry, no seeking. Is this why we are
living? Is it to read all this that the gundas, gangsters, hit so and so, they criticized and talked against another, they did this to
someone. Have we come into this world to do all this?
Man’s thinking is all wrong. Be very careful of this gross level essence/jad tattwa. This gross level is your own surroundings.
Besides this there is also the collective subconscious, which can be called heaven and because of this the damage is being done
is the most in Sahaja Yoga. And if such a thing has happened with someone it becomes very difficult for him to get God in
Sahaja Yoga. In this it is neither my fault nor yours. It is partly the fault of your karmas (deeds). Otherwise why did you go to such
a place by which you got so damaged?
Sahaja Yoga is life’s progress in full alertness taking place spontaneously. You cannot get the Param from bhoots, prets,spirits
or even saints. These are dead people. Param can come only when one is alive. If it was among the dead then why would these
dead people come here? Why are they sitting on us? To be alive is necessary. Till a man is not alive, aware, and his awareness is
not fully awakened till then Sahaja Yoga does not descend down into him. Whatever you get in the fully awakened state, that is
Param/Supreme. People think that in Samadhi we have put our eyes upwards and got lost, are sitting for two, two hours. This
will not happen through Sahaja Yoga.
This is your entire subconscious which I call as region /loka of death. This is where you are going. From all this there is going to
be no benefit to you whatsoever. The one who wants the Param/Supreme must think that that is what I must get is with full
awareness and with full freedom. You have the full freedom. In fact there should be no type of devotion feelings towards me. I
am just like an ordinary, mild woman, an ordinary housewife. You have not to think that I am something special. With such a
thought you must have this type of freedom, only then you will get. You might be ten or one it is enough for me. It does not
happen with numbers though we will have to increase the numbers. Because if the work gets done in full force. Actually the
Param is flowing from above for a new creation, a new awareness, for a new type of human. It has done the arrangement for it. A
full of love, full of knowledge and a beautiful creation of humans will have to be done and will be done.
You people have listened to my lecture for such a long time. On the day of Guru Purnima, that in this life I have become a Guru. I
had not done this type of work in any other lifetime. It is the first time that I have done the work of the Guru. Maybe it is because
the Mother has to be the Guru. This is a matter of the Kalyuga. That is why the tremendous Shakti of the Divine which must flow
from the heart of a mother , and by Her grace and compassion the Kundalini should be treasured and it should be taken to that
top where She in Her glory, Her Joy, and Her splendor be seated, and perhaps that is in my destiny.
That is why in this birth this position of the Guru has been created. If the Mother becomes the Guru, it is a very difficult, as a
mother is very tender. A male Guru will beat up, hit or even scold but for a mother when she utters even one harsh word her heart
bleeds and pains a lot. When she sees that her children have come through such difficulties, and how she has to gather them

with love and care and take them across, that her responsibility grows so much that her entire character changes.
But from ancient times it has been known that no one is greater than the mother as a guru. Only make such a one your guru who
is greater than you, the one who is greater than you is God. It was said about Guru Ramdas swami that make only such a person
your guru who himself is paras/ touchstone, and who just by touching others does not make them into gold but makes them
elixir/touchstone. He makes others like himself. That is how the form of the mother is. A mother lives for her children. Lives in
the glory of her children. That is why perhaps in this lifetime the Divine wanted this that this love and this knowledge should
come through a mother.
Now we will go into meditation and after this, so all of you sit with full attention. Leave your thoughts and assumptions aside
because you have to get your welfare and well-being. Be good to yourself. Don’t take out your faults. If you are catching onto
something then just leave it for the time being. I have nothing to take from you, and I don’t want to take away your freedom. In
any way I don’t want to snatch away your freedom.
Like people will run after someone like mad, will spend lakhs of rupees on them, give them things. Why do they take things? If he
is a guru then he cannot take anything from you. What will you give the Guru? What will you give me? You can give me nothing.
You cannot even give me vibrations. You will be surprised that you cannot give me vibrations. One day I hurt my foot and a lady
doctor said that “Mother I will give you vibrations.” I said “Ok give.” When she tried to give vibrations they flew so strongly that
she went into meditation. She said “Mataji, such tremendous vibrations are coming” And my injury became so light.
Guru should be one who can take nothing from you. The one who is sitting at the top, he will flow downwards; nothing from
below can flow upwards towards him. It is impossible. If I say, my son, please do not give me as this is just eyewash. You can
give me nothing, in fact just the opposite. You ask Me. Your whole personality just boils over and all the forceful and spectacular
Shaktis/ energies start racing within with such a force that with what kind of love should I look after this child, anyone has to ask
for just a bit. Ask for the Param/Supreme.
On this Guru Purnima I bless all of you and all those who are realized, are very special people, and I would say to them that just
as you have got, give to others. You too have to bring them around. Might be that they may get annoyed with you,hit you, beat
you, they may not remain, but this is nothing. I have borne much more than this. That is why with joy and not arguments; they
may not believe in you, doesn’t matter. Leave them. They may argue, just leave them. The ones who believe in you give them.
This is what you have to give and this is all you can give that my love may reach each corner of the world and each house may be
lit with it.
May God Bless You.

1973-0828, Shri Krishna Puja: Most Dynamic Power of Love
View online.
28 August 1973
Most Dynamic Power Of Love
Krishna Puja
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
28 August 1973, Shri Krishna Puja, Most Dynamic Power of Love, Mumbai (India)
… by the Divine. For example, if I know only my head, that is not sufficient. If I know only my neck, that is not sufficient. If I know
only my legs, that is not sufficient. But the more I know about myself, the more dynamic I become, the more expansive I become.
And all the great that existed — or all the people who were called as great — are great because they lived in many human beings.
I feel that warmth in the atmosphere, as you are feeling because you know they are not foreigners, they are your brothers and
sisters. There are so many stories in Puranas like this, that… I will not name it, but once two brothers met in a jungle. But they
thought that they were enemies, and they wanted to fight with each other. And when they came to blows, they couldn’t hit each
other. Then they took out their arrows — the arrows wouldn’t work. They were quite surprised at this, and when they asked each
other, “Who is your mother?”, they found out mother was the same. And then they realized that they were not foreigners neither
enemies but they were made of the same fibre. What sweetness, what beauty that knowledge has given them! And what security
of understanding that everywhere in the whole world we have brothers and sisters, who are on their inner being, on their divine,
and how we are bound together with that love!
When I talk of love, people think that I am trying to make you weak people — because people think those who love are weak. But
the most dynamic power in this world is that of love. Is the most aggressive power — is that of love. Even we, when we suffer in
love, it is out of our strength that we suffer and not out of our weakness.
For example, there was a teacher in China who used to teach the cocks how to fight. And the king of that place took his cocks to
that teacher and told him that “You please teach them how to fight.” After one month, when the king went to take those cocks
with him, he was surprised that the cocks were just silent, doing nothing. And he told the teacher that “What have you done to my
cocks? They are not at all aggressive, they are not doing anything! How are they going to fight it out? There’s going to be a race,
there’s going to be an exhibition of their strength, and what are we going to do about it?” He said, “You just take them.” He took
those two cocks with him and put them in the arena where there were other cocks who had come to fight. These two cocks were
very nicely standing. All the other cocks started coaxing and torturing. They were just standing and looking at them. All the other
cocks were surprised at their behaviour and thought that they were very powerful. And they all fled away.
The love that I’m talking about, the divine love, makes you not only strong but dynamic. It is the greatest luminous power that we
can think of. Only when love is surrounded by gross and is lost in the gross, it looks as if it is weak and “under chains”. The time it
is released, the dynamic power of love can transcend all the evil powers of the world.
When people get their Realization, automatically the ego drops out — to a great extent, I should say. Because you say that the
vibrations are passing; you don’t say that you are giving them. Because the dropping of the ego sometimes it happens that you
feel that whatever you wanted to have you have got it and you better not talk about it. When there is any opposition from
anywhere, you shun it and sit away from it. You don’t want to face the opposition — of any negative opposition, whether it is by
speech or by… even by evil methods. We run away from that, thinking, “Oh God! How are we going to face it?”
On the contrary, a person who is negative, who has got hatred, becomes [inaudible] as they call it, means a person who talks big.
Such a person talks, starts talking big. He thinks he is above everybody else, he can befool all the world. He takes a responsibility

on himself. He starts a big ashram or some big place where he sits down with all his ignorance and starts spreading his
knowledge — the so-called — to people. By his methods people get impressed, and they all go and fall at his feet. While the
Realized sits at home quietly, wondering what are these fools doing.
But it is not now for the Realized to sit down and to wonder and laugh at the foolishness of the people who are not yet Realized.
Not even to take pity on them but to come out, come out with the sword of love to win the whole world. It is very, very essential. If
the creation has to be saved, then you are not to keep mum about it. All the wrong ideas about love, all the falsehood about love
has to be given up. One must know that it is the dynamic power. And it won’t allow you to sit comfortably with yourself, enjoying
the peace and the bliss, when the rest of the world is not enjoying that and is playing into the hands of the evil geniuses who
have come in this world to destroy and to bring the satanic realm on this earth.
Now the days are gone when the people had to suffer. Christ suffered for us. Of course, Christ never suffered, because He never
suffered. He never wept. He was like those cocks, a very powerful personality. But today is the day to brighten up your
understanding about your own strength that is within you. Those who are gross should worry about their insecurities, and their
problems, and their organizations — but not for the people who are realized. I have told you many a times — and today he
[presumably one of the yogis] also remarked — that you should know you are never alone when you are realized. There have been
many people who have been realized, before even you were born, who exist, who are anxious to help you at every moment. In our
shastras [scriptures] we call them chiranjivas [eternal beings], you know them. They are people who are niranjanas [pure, free
from falsehood]. As he said about Bhairava and Hanumana, all these people exist, and they are waiting just for a call from you.
Once we went to the market, and there was a problem about something. And I had somebody with Me, a disciple… who was also
with Me. I just wanted to see what will be his reaction. He tried to argue out with a person to tell him about something. So, he told
Me, “Mataji, let us go now.” When we came out of the shop, I said, “What are you going to do about it?” He said, “I have already
told Hanuman to look after that part.” And the work was done. It is gross, but it happens. When they fail [Shri Mataji could mean
“you fail”], you can leave it to anyone of them, and they will have to jolly well do it. Because it is you who are on the stage and not
they. They are the background people. They are the playbacks. But you must open your mouth; otherwise, if they start thinking,
what will people say? They are going to help you in every way, but how far are you standing on your security? How far are you
standing on your property, on your understanding of yourself?
It’s a great war going on. You are not aware of it? Some of you are. Some of you are definitely aware of it because they have had
the experience of fighting it out. It’s a big war on. Now specially, when ten rakshasas [demons] have taken their avataras
[incarnations]. And for you to be so feeble… You are still small children, no doubt, because you got your Realization only a few
days back. But if you want, you can grow very fast. You can grow into big, big giants. All of you can grow. Only thing, you have to
decide that you have to grow within. There are so many things that you only have discovered, by which a person grows. I can give
you food, but you have to grow yourself.
Wherever you see the negativity, you have to stand up and say, “This is negativity and nothing else, whether you like it or not.” In
that, you love that person, you don’t hate. Only talking sweetly is not the idea of love. No, a mother sometimes even scolds the
child. Doesn’t mean that she doesn’t love him. If it is necessary, you have to tell the person that it is negativity. Of course, if
there’s a Realized person, he won’t mind any correction, because he wants the correction, he knows that it has to be corrected.
The instrument has to be corrected. But a person who doesn’t understand, you have to force your love on that person. You can
force that love, you know that — sitting down here. Many people have tried putting love around certain people who were trying to
be mischievous — and they have been able to achieve great results. Those people have turned back and come back. Only by
putting your hand and putting your attention on that person and moving this hand like this, the love encircles, and the person
comes back.
There is no doubt that there is negativity and positivity, nothing in between these, you must remember. There is no compromise
between the two. Either it is light and darkness, or it is positive and negative — definitely there are two things that are fighting.
Only thing, your will — that’s the trouble with the whole joke. That your will is respected, your will is throughout respected. If you
have the will to be a giant that loves, you can be.

The other day I met a psychiatrist, and he was catching his superego very much. I said, “What’s wrong with you?” He said, “My
childhood. My childhood, I couldn’t get much love.” I said, “Now I am there. You come in My lap. Take the love.” He said, “I want
to flow my love, Mother. I want to open out myself, completely, without any fear.” I said, “You just start it. Don’t worry what people
are going to misunderstand, what people are going to say. It’s nothing important what people are going to say or anything. For
love, the satisfaction is only love, that you love another person.” “You just flow your love,” I said, “and you will see it will work out.
Just decide that ‘I am going to love people.’ And once you decide that, the whole heaven, the whole power of the heaven will fall
at your feet. You believe Me in this.”
If you see otherwise, I am an ordinary housewife. Some people always say, “Mataji, how can be like You?” Why not? I am just like
you. I have the same problems as you have. But only thing I know, that I am nothing but embodiment of that love that is divine,
and I can’t exist without it. Every moment of My life let the love flow, let the love flow. Every wave of My mind conveys the love.
And that makes you completely powerful.
If you read… I was reading Devi Mahatmyam that… they talk about a rakshasa who faced Primordial Mother, the Divine Mother,
and he laughed at Her: “You woman! What can you do to me, you are a woman! What can you do to me?” And She smiled at him
and said, “All right, come along, let us see.” And with one stroke, She cut his throat. Very clearly that shows that positivity can cut
the throat of negativity. There is no himsa [violence] in that. You must remember the difference between the two. If negativity is
cut and positive brought out, that is the greatest ahimsa [non-violence] you can do to someone. You have seen what negativity
does to people; you have now known what is negativity. You have seen how people suffer with spirits on them.
And here, they are also anxious to be loved your way, you’ll be surprised to know that — if you really love them. They themselves
come to Me and say, “Give me salvation, Mother.” They come to Me only for that — sometimes with you — that I should give
them salvation. And if I promise that, they take the birth again. But there are rakshasas, there are rakshasas.
As I told you the other day, the Kali Yuga has laid a beautiful stage, and a very wonderful drama is to be played — in which the
Ravana has to love Sita as a mother, the Kamsa has to fall at the feet of Radha. Perhaps, you do not know that Krishna wanted to
kill Kamsa. At that time, he was His uncle. So, you see, the feeling came in Him, of His mother, that [she would say]: “After all, he
is my brother.” So He asked Radha, and Radha killed him — the Radha, who loved the whole world at that time. She is the
embodiment of love, and She killed Kamsa — because it was to be. When you are playing in the hands of God, then, if He wants
to kill some body, it has to be slain. But first of all you have to be in the hands of God completely. It is His love only which kills
this body.
And when the songs of their strength and victory is sung — you have seen it, all My chakras, how they start working and vibrating.
Because the strength of those victorious days is still lingering on, and it is going to work through you. But what about your poor
instrument, which is moving little slowly? The time when love has to rule, the Satya Yuga, if it has to come, it is going to be
through your efforts, now. Before Sahaja Yoga, no efforts. But now, all your efforts are divine. Whatever you do, whatever
sympathetic you activate, you are getting it through parasympathetic — you don’t do anything at all. But you can see yourself
what stakes are involved.
You are the chosen ones, otherwise why is it that you are the only people who got this Realization and so much you have come
forward? Some of you got it only few days back and have gone very far. Why? You are the chosen ones, and you have to take it
upon yourself to be the channels of that divine love, that dynamic power, which is going to transform the whole conception of
hatred on which all these nations and all these differences are created. It looks sometimes: how? how can it be? But now the
days are gone, of Gokul [city where Shri Krishna spent His childhood]. I was thinking of it. Of the time when Krishna used to play
His flute and He tried His Sahaja Yoga on the gopis [cowherd girls] and the gopas [cowherd boys]. Oh, we tried and tried and
tried, in different lives! Nothing worked. And now it is going to click like a spark. The chain reaction will start. But we have to have
strong machines to carry that. Otherwise the fuse will be off. Only the strength that is in you is to be felt by your attention. That’s
the only thing you have to do — is to feel your attention and give up all that is falsehood. All that is falsehood you see within

yourself, and you will know what is falsehood and just drop it. Accept only the truth, and the truth will give you that power to be
the real instrument, to carry this channel, that force of love. It should not mean that you have to be egoistic — you cannot be even
if you try to. You cannot harm anyone even if you want to trouble.
So many of you have expressed that “Mataji, You are giving it to every Dick, Tom and Harry.” I can’t give it to Dick, Tom and Harry
— it has to be a man who has been searching, it has to be a woman who has been searching in their previous lives. You should
know that whatever you have got it, you have got it in your own right. So, a person may look like a Dick, Tom, Harry, but he is not,
he’s a great saint. They are all saints sitting here. It’s a centre and nucleus of saintliness where the complete Divine is flowing.
Only thing is, let it flow out from you.
This power is that of God, and it is not your responsibility to worry as to whether it will do good or bad. Even if you think that it
may do some bad things according to the moral sciences of this world, ultimately it is going to be all right. Why that Jarasandha
was to be killed? Why that Kansa was to be killed? Why Ravana was to be killed? Of course, killing doesn’t help much — that I
have realized. Because all those who were killed are back again in their saddles. But still, you don’t fight those horrible people.
You just fight yourself out. You just watch yourself. Where are you? What are you doing? Are you on the divine or on the gross?
Just think about it every moment, every moment you are in meditation. Just think of the moment and the dynamism of that
moment. The complete power that is filling every moment just to go inside you. It will flow through your Sahasrara inside your
being, and completely revolve around your whole being, and transform the inside into a complete Chaitanya Shakti, a complete
Divine Power. Allow it to come in, accept it. Accept it without any fear. Let it get in. Every moment, every moment keep awake.
It’s a very precarious time that we are up to. I have only two hands, you can see that very clearly. And though Mr. ___ says that I
can do everything, I can do everything but not to make you do something. Your will will be respected throughout.
Every other thing can be looked after except for one — that you should be a perfect machine, a perfect channel, a perfect flute for
My Lord to play that tune of love. It is for you to clear out all your seven holes. It is for you to clear out your hollowness and to be
complete within yourself — and He knows His job. He is the artist. But you are the instruments. And the harmonious music from
so many souls can fill the ears of these evil people and can penetrate into their heart and put love into them, and may be that
they themselves will give up their evil ways and fall at the feet of love.
Krishna is to be born within you today. A five-year-old boy went to kill Kaliya [monstrous serpent who lived in river Yamuna and
poisoned its water]. That Krishna is to be born within you. [He] went and sat on the Kaliya’s Sahasrara and was pressing with His
feet, and all the people were seeing this great drama of Krishna’s dancing on the Kaliya’s Sahasrara. Krishna is to be born within
your being. When you are Krishna, you are not going to see Him.
Let us now go to the state which is beyond words, beyond thoughts, into the realm of thoughtless awareness, where the Divine is
pouring its blessings. These people have decided today to have a puja, and you know what happens to Me when you do My puja.
So, with all those problems that we’ll be facing later, I would like all of you to be attentive about the puja and to take full
advantage of that. With this puja you get the Mother’s protection, to begin with. And My chakras, when they start moving, they
give you special powers of love, and bless all your chakras, and fill them up completely. So I would like you — though some two
people are coming to do this — all of you to feel that you all are doing it — and you can feel it that way with oneness. And the
blessings of My being will flow to you automatically.

1973-0903, Understand your importance
View online.
3 September 1973
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - VERIFIED
Understand your importance, Mumbai (India), September 3rd, 1973
[Translation from Hindi]
Out of you, many are there who have just got their realization, some are there who have got their realization a few days back and
some are there who have got their realization from a long time, who have understood this thing that what is our consciousness
and how it works and how we make it our own.
Because of the three types of people here, I will have to repeat again and also explain what is the meaning of realization, what is
the speciality of a realized person and how we should stay in a realized state. Whatever you have read before, for now just forget
it.
The first question is: what is the meaning of realization?
When you come to My feet many are told that, “You have not got your realization” and many are told that, “You are realized.” This
means that realization has got nothing to do with your outer body, mind, intellect, but it is with something within which connects
in some and for others, it doesn’t.
In realization, when you come to My feet, the people can feel that the flow starts coming with a force on the hands. And you also
feel that something is happening within you even from the feet. In your directions the power of consciousness is playing, inside
and outside, like every tree has the power of consciousness inside it; it's leaves have the power of consciousness. And in this
way, the power of consciousness has its abode in the whole world.
Just like the ether is in all four directions, in the same way, this power of consciousness is flowing in all directions. Its abode is
inside and outside. And the same power does the work of the material power. This power is the Kundalini. It is only a word.
Actually, God has given no name or meaning to anything, but man has given it the name of Kundalini. The power that is called
Kundalini is situated at the base of the spine in the sacrum bone.
I am going to write an article explaining the meaning and the scientific explanation about it.
When you live as a normal human you live in the body, mind and emotions, and you keep on searching for that thing by which you
get joy. When you become one with that power of consciousness by the awakening of the Kundalini, and it comes to the
Sahasrara by becoming one with it, then your attention goes on to your Kundalini.
By going on your Kundalini your attention goes onto the Kundalini of others too. It means that till now your attention went to
three places and now it goes to a fourth place which is the formless power and by doing that you go beyond thoughts and you
start witnessing the mind, emotions and body as a witness.
Now those people from whose hands the vibrations are flowing, they don’t understand that “We have got these so easily that we
don’t know what a great thing we have got”.

Now the biggest problem is how did we get such a great thing so easily. We must understand that we get human birth so easily
that we cannot understand how difficult it is to get a human birth. It is got after many births. And to get reborn again is also after
a lot of seeking and many lives.
But this happens so easily that we are not able to understand its value. We also think that how did it happen so quickly. The
reason is that until now you were seeking outside and it is with you. Like there is a diamond within you and you are searching for
it all over the world. Then someone tells you that the diamond is with you and you will say, “Why was I searching all over the
world while the diamond was with me all along?”.
This is an actuality which we have got through Sahaja Yoga. In actuality, we get it so easily that we cannot understand from
where to where we have reached. Or one can say that in modern times you can go to the moon at once. If there is a method that
you can go to the moon in a second, then you will feel the same way as to where we have reached, “How can it be?”
In the same way, this happening is so spontaneous that to feel like this is natural. But something that happens spontaneously or
happens with a lot of difficulties, then we remember what we got with a lot of difficulties. This is the nature of man. And man
considers what he earns through his effort as important.
If one gets lakhs of rupees from his father he will not have value for it. But if with his own effort he earns even two rupees he
feels that he has earned through his own effort. This is a sign of his Ego.
But in Sahaja Yoga when the ego gets broken, then to get anything through ego has no significance. The ego is dissatisfied
within and thus raises such questions such as, “Why is this in Sahaja?” Many of you have seen the methods of realization. In
every book, you will find new methods, that what such and such happens after realization.
Now from these how many are realized and how many are not? God only knows! But you people who have got your realization
know that when you first get realized, your Sahasrara breaks open and you become one with the vibrations. Then after that he
remains here. His sight comes onto his and other’s Kundalini.
But the vibrations that are coming from within him sometimes stop at once. If he puts his hand on top of the head where there is
a soft spot is he will see that it calcifies.
Now you got realization yesterday and it calcified. What is the cause of that? The cause is that our ego and superego get parted
and our attention comes into the centre but then they grow back again and become one so the calcification takes place and the
flow stops. But still, you can understand the Kundalini. How?
If you come back and put your hands towards Me and go into meditation you will be able to see that this hand or thumb has
caught because they have their realization. But an unrealized person when he sits with his hands towards Me he will not feel
anything.
They will feel that this finger of mine is caught. It is coming in this one and not in the other. And from those who are
knowledgeable will understand which is the finger associated with which Chakra.
This cannot be known through mental calculations. I did not tell you. Because if I told you people will say that Mataji is just
talking uselessly. So I felt better. See for yourself. Then when he put his hands towards the other, his finger started burning. So
then I said, “Keep your hand on his Nabhi chakra and see. Close your eyes and see what chakra is moving. You will see that your
Nabhi is moving. So when you put your hands towards him you saw that the finger associated with the Nabhi chakra was
burning.”
And all will feel the same finger on themselves when they put their hands towards that man. You can write any books about it but

the way it works, it works like that only.
Just yesterday a person was arguing with Me about Gyaneshwari. If Gyaneshwar was here we could ask him today. He too was
trying to find a way on how to explain it. But he could not do it as he died at a very young age. Because of many people dying
before their time a lot of misunderstanding has spread in the world.
And then the second mistake they did is that they wrote a book about this. That is why I am afraid of writing books. Because the
moment I write a book people will start learning by heart and with that also a kind of conditioning comes in.
So now instead of thinking what is in it and what happens you must think that this is a new experience, a new thing, we are new
people and we have to understand something new. We are going to sit here as new. Like a small child from childhood listens to
every new word and then learns by repeating many times. So, in the same way, you all who have come into this new Divine
Region must understand this divinity. Its sight (way of seeing) should be different.
When I used to read this name ‘Divyalok’(Divine Region), I used to think that the person who kept this name must have kept it
after a lot of thinking. What a beautiful name… Divyalok. The Divine Region that you have come into, you must understand that
this is all new for you. All the experience in it is new. It is not something written somewhere and experienced by others. It is what
we have to experience.
No one has experienced something like this before. And nowhere in the world has this experiment been successful anywhere
before this because I too have come on this earth many times before. I have thought of doing this many times before and this is
the first time in this lifetime that this work has been successful.
That is why whatever unfinished that is left you have to complete it. You have not come to belittle or pull-down anyone. Whatever
incompleteness has been left, you have to complete it. Just think that you are new persons in this modern world with an
expanded vision, and you have to guide the whole world.
In this, all realized people are sitting under one roof and getting this Supreme Shakti. A very great power is flowing from within
you, which is not there in other people in this world. You know this. You should have no doubt on that because now you are
realized. Those who still doubt is because they have just got their realization. In a few days, they too will not have doubts.
Then it becomes necessary that you understand your importance. The greatest importance is that you have now got the fourth
dimension. Which fourth dimension? That how you can go from this to that. Please understand this. Now from this how you can
go to the other, stay there, stay steady there. This is a very important point. If you look at your attention, you will see that there is
a kind of an expansion.
Look at your attention and you will see how it goes to something and how you can remove it. It is expanding and you can see it.
Just like a balloon, which will expand like this. In the same way, you watch your attention. Your attention can go to something
and even come back. See how our attention has gone onto something. For example, your attention is on a sari. Now when it is on
a sari you can pull it back from there. You can take your attention and expand it or contract it. And you can take it wherever you
want.
But you are completely spread out within it. Like the sea. In the sea, the water goes to every corner and goes back. But its reality
is in the centre of the ocean. The reality, the is-ness that which happens, is within. And the reaction of that is consciousness. It
goes to anything and then comes back again. With this, you learn detachment. Just become detached from anything.
Now, for example, that vehicle came. There is a very bad smell coming from it. If you take your attention to the bad smell then it
smells bad. If you take your attention away then the bad smell is not coming. You have got the power of Detachment within you.
Slowly, keep practicing on your attention. Man is sitting in the midst of the entire drama. He sees, “What is this? What is this?
What is this? This is also, this is also.”

People say that this is all theirs. Put your attention to it. As you put your attention to it you will know, you will know that you can
also remove your attention from it. Your attention does not involve anything. And whatever love you send towards it [with your
attention] will just go around it and will come back to you but [thanks to your attention] will not get lost.
Understand this. Before when you used to observe something with thoughts like if something moves from here, it will keep
moving and its circumference will be kept. So [now] it will circle and then come back to you. It will not catch. It will not catch hold
of it. The attachment will also finish off in this way. Every attachment of mind, body and intellect gets released but also of all the
other things within us.
This truth that we are humans first and last also gets released because we have broken our attachment. The way to break the
attachment in meditation is to always increase your attention. See? Now it has increased, it has gone to a point and now bring it
back. This special power has come to you after realization.
Until now I had told you many things and besides that also, pay attention to this. In deeper meditation what you have to do is the
expansion of your attention and its pulling back. When you will start doing contraction and expansion, you will be surprised that
your depth will grow.
For example, if a person who spread a lot of wheat his spread is more. Then you gathered the wheat and made a pile, then its
height grew. In the same way, if you gathered your attention then see, your inner depth grew and knowledge came in. Then you
started to laugh that “Oh, I was wrapped up in all this? Is this anything to cling on to?” You will feel that this is not anything great.
There is a boy from here who got realization, went for an interview for a job. When he came back I asked him whether he got it.
He said that he did not feel whether he got it or not and will get it or not. He got selected for the job. The people on the board told
me that this boy was amazing and was not scared. He came, said very clearly what he had to say, was not frightened and went.
How did this happen? I had told them that he is now realized soul and, “Watch him and examine his uniqueness.” They said he
came and gave straight answers, there was no deception, he spoke clearly, and stood in a way that, “If you want to take me or
not that’s fine.” Neither did he insult us nor hang behind us wagging his tail.
Attention is also like this. When the attention has nature, then divinity comes into man when he gets realization. When his
attention is entangled in every place, then his attention becomes just like tendrils come out especially the climbing ivy. They
come out and catch this, then catch the other, and then she slowly climbs upwards.
In the same way, a man who has not got realization catches onto this, onto that, then another, and that is how he sustains
himself this manner. Sometimes he thinks: “I have no position, how will I move in the world? Oh! I have no money, how will I
move in the world? Oh! I do not have this, how will I move in the world?”.
But a tree which stands on itself stands in its independence. Now, this is happening with you too. You are standing in your
independence but because of fear you are taking out tendrils from within yourself and catching this, then that, then another.
As soon as you know you are standing there, the first thing is not to oppose the attention. It should not be stopped. That
attention will not be entangled anywhere, you try, but it will not get entangled. Try this in deep meditation. Any big question
comes before you, just look at it, and you will be surprised that the attention goes there and comes back. The attention does not
get entangled.
Now think that a very great tragedy has taken place here but the world is going on. Pain and Pleasure are our mental
calculations: what is the great thing that makes us unhappy or makes us very happy, or what is it that is painful or joy-giving that
we hate someone or love someone? There is no great reason that this should be. Slowly your attention will grow tremendously.
Then the attention becomes proficient.

You have seen that your hands start burning, you work on someone and something happens to you. In the beginning, this will
happen. And should keep away from such a person. Wherever possible don’t put your hand in the fire. When a girl learns to cook
she learns first on a small stove. She puts a cloth to lift hot things and learns slowly. Once her hand has learnt how to burn then
she works on a bigger stove.
First, she takes tongs then a Tava [on which Indian chapattis are made], and then when she becomes an expert she makes Rotis
with her hands. She can put her hands on a stove directly and flip the rotis. In the same way what we in the beginning call evil
also goes away. So that which is called evil will run away by itself. It will not affect you. When this state comes then what is the
need for Mother’s protection.
You yourself will become great yourself. Then you will not catch or anything. Wherever you go there negative people will run
away. When such a capability comes then such a question does not arise. Like I have said that there’re only two ways for this:
one is a meditation from within and to watch the outside.
Now it is working out by itself. They say that first ‘do’ good karmas. ‘Good’ or ‘bad’ is also the thinking of humans. When Doing
becomes Non-doing it means, that we no more feel that we are doing anything, as the light of the sun, it is in non-doing though
work is being done through him.
When the non-doing comes into one fully, which means that the cool breeze is flowing through the hands and is happening, then
whatever is within, then whatever karmas that are gathered within us from before, which we say that we will have to bear the
results of our karmas.
Lots of sick people come and ask me: “These are our karmas, will you suck them in?”. I say: “Yes, I will. Nothing to worry about”.
You have come to the river Ganga so you should wash yourself. If because of your karmas your hands and feet pain, then doesn’t
matter, I can absorb it all.
But your karmas went up from your body into your mind. Now how will the karmas be removed from your mind? They ran away
from your body due to Mataji. But the karmas are sitting in the mind. You have got your realization, but still, will this filth get
removed? That is why if you keep doing these actions (of Sahaja Yoga) again and again, then all this gets drowned in akarma
(non-action). And however much you do in this life, that much your karmas will finish off.
Slowly as you do your karmas, and so slowly get out, and when you are completely cleared out from within, then from within that
same good faith this likes, dislikes etc., nothing remains. If you are sitting, you are just sitting. If you get food to eat then fine or
don’t get to eat that is fine too.
Whatever you do, you are doing the work of the Divine. You are not doing anything of your own work. The work of the Divine is
being done through you and you don’t even know like the sun which is giving its light. The moon is reflecting the light of the sun
from itself. This is the ocean is rising and ebbing and sending clouds from within itself.
All these karmas are being done. But no one thinks that we are doing. There are trees and from them come the fruits and from
the fruits come the seeds and then from the seeds the trees. They are doing such great work. But none of them feels that we are
doing something. Everything is moving leisurely. This question has come only into humans.
They all are in harmony. But we have this question because in humans God has specially given the boon of Ego by which we can
know Him. We have seen that by killing Ego it does not die. That is why if it gets released by itself, then this is the way of Sahaja
Yoga.
It gets released from within you. What one has to do that whatever karma we can do with our hands we should do. And the other

is going into deep meditation, till that state does come within you where nothing is ‘bad’ or ‘good’.
You have seen that wherever I go neither any negativity catches Me nor bhoots catch Me or nor My finger catches nor My hands
catch. At each time the flow is the same. If you people feel any heat from Me, then it means that there is some fault within you.
This is an example in front of you. I am also like you but I am an example in front of you.
So in the same way you become like this then no devil or evil will remain. Whosoever will come in front of you should dissolve in
your love. And if he does not dissolve then he will run away. A day will come and that day you will not need this protection.
You people have found many ways of protection. These people can tell you about some of the ways if you want. You can ask
them. Like taking vibrations on the photo. Taking out (vibrations) with feet or taking out with water. How to put your own
Bandhan etc. Taking different names, etc. There are many types. If you want to know about them then you can talk to these
people, then these people can tell you all this.
But a realized person when he sits for meditation firstly must see that what is coming from Mataji is there any of our catch in it?
Are we getting vibrations? If they have stopped then we should remove the cause. These people can tell you how to remove it. In
the same way, the vibrations have stopped then the cause of it can be removed.
If the hand is burning then how to remove it? Just blow on it, and remove it, and take the name, and it will just get removed by
blowing it away. It will get removed in such a way that you will feel that it was never there. It is in the atmosphere so one catches.
Just like a small girl learns how to cook.
And when you become learned in this method then only have you become a real Yogi. When this ability has come fully, then you
become a real yogi. You get the perfect knowledge. When you get the perfect knowledge about this then you become the
knowledge.
Means that you don’t do anything, it keeps happening automatically. If the microphone becomes perfect and My voice is going
through it perfectly then it does not have to do anything, it does not need to know anything. All of this records by itself. So the
Speaker, the Doer and the One who looks after everyone is the Divine who is on the head of everyone.
Realized people should know one more thing. This is also a very important point, by knowing which a kind of self-reliance can
come, that the Devatas are hovering over each realized soul. They say that on top of an evil person the bhoots hover, in the same
way, the Devatas are eager to help those people who are realized. They get the fragrance and they hover precisely around them.
From among you, some must have told, this lady was saying that there was a bhoot-badha on her brother-in-law. And at about
three-thirty, his condition deteriorated. And he started screaming. And then after that, she said that such a bad smell came and
they could not understand what to do. Then they started taking My name and started giving vibrations and just as he cooled
down a fragrance started coming and he became alright.
You people should also before getting realization or after realization get fragrance many times. So consciousness gives
fragrance. Chaitanya gives a lot of fragrance. And is joy-giving. So with this, you get the fragrance. There is so much that is
non-fragrant, but it can fall by itself if you keep your meditative state alright, means that you keep yourself steady.
There is nothing to feel bad about it. You have seen that we are unique. We are higher than the common man. So-and-so
[Uncertain. Names may be: Chandu Bhai, Devade, Lal Sahib – ed.] is very great. Many have gone much above. If you take their
names then I think mostly all have gone ahead. And still all catch a bit. All catch a little bit. One person had got caught up very
badly. A few days before he had got caught up very badly. It’s ok if he got caught up. Doesn’t matter. At least they understand
that they are caught up and that is why this has happened, that he understood that he got caught up.
To remove it is very easy. For a realized person it is very easy. It should be removed in any way. How to remove it, what to do

about it, are the methods these people know. And experiment on yourself with different methods. Like it can be removed by
standing near the sea. Earlier many realized people used to go and sit in water. It is true. They used to get so disturbed that their
fingers would start burning.
There is a Gagan Baba Maharaj who used to sit in water. His fingers had got small with burning. He had got curative powers but
he could not understand why his fingers had become small with burning. His fingers got so small by burning; like you know how
your fingers burn. But poor thing he didn’t know that.
Now he does not come to Bombay city because in Bombay the hands burn so much and he didn’t know how to make it alright so
he has gone away from here. And he keeps sitting in water. Now there is someone who knows and can tell you. There is
someone who can explain that if your hands are burning how to cure it. Save your hands. Our Mr Devade’s hands got burned very
badly by working on 2-3 people, that now if he looks at someone he gets nervous. He says, “Mataji, yesterday when that bearded
man came his hands started rotating in the air.”
So now think that there is someone who can tell you, make you understand that after realization it is such a dangerous thing.
Anyone can catch you. You are just like small children. And such a small child that it is very necessary that you should look after
your state. My hand is on you all, all the time. And each moment I am thinking of you.
I have a lot of love for you all and I feel very proud and also get joy that so many are My children today. It is a feeling of great
pride for a Mother that they have got realization. But what you have got, don’t waste it on petty things.
Just now Mr Jadhav had experience and was telling Me, even Mr Patil and ladies can tell about it. How they got experiences and
how they can make someone alright. Means that whatever problem there is you can solve it. But you too should also learn. You
too learn. You too get to know. You are the doctor and you are the medicine.
It is going to go through your hands and you are going to understand it. So if you got a little hurt somewhere Mother is sitting
here to heal you. Where were such people before? Because now, poor things, the ones who have got their realization say that: “O
God save us, from where have we got our realization”.
Earlier when people got their realization they would sit with tongs in their hands (to save themselves from negativity). It was not
their fault. Anybody who came they would beat them. If anyone came who would radiate heat or cause a burning sensation, they
used to beat them with tongs. I have seen them in my childhood. They used to be called ‘the Baba with the tongs’!
I used to be surprised that whoever came he would hit with a pair of tongs. But I have never hit with Tongs. Then who would go
to them? The reason for this is that there was no one to explain to them or guide them.
Now you people are curing so many diseases. You have cured diseases like cancer. You can cure cancer. You have removed so
many types of badhas. You have done so much work. Naturally then something or the other will catch you. But then there is a
cure for it. There is a hospital for you and someone is sitting here to guide you. And there is someone to explain the intricacies of
it. So there is no need to get frightened. But if you are still scared then you cannot progress in this lifetime. This is the question of
realized people.
But we should understand another thing. There are many Saints who have died but they are not able to take their birth. They have
not been able to find such a person. That is another question. Such Saints are also reaching a viewpoint that among us there are
people who can never be realized.
There are many among us who will never get realization because they have done such karmas before. Some have done
planchette [calling spirits] where they have got stuck or some such similar thing. Where they say that we should come into them.
You will find badhas in them. But they are stuck and there is no need to fight with them. In fact, the very clerical people among
you will feel that Mataji is saying such things.

Don’t provoke them because if you provoke them then it can happen that the bhoots can go into them. Bhoots are already within
them. If there will be no bhoots then the saints will come. When the saints come, then our work will be done. That is why in many
people the saints have [come in/entered?]. They have expressed this to Me that they want to come. “But if we come in the form
of little children then what kind of help Shri Mataji can get?”
So it is better that such people who come and one can see that they can’t get realization. There are many people like that. The
ones who are not getting their realization there is no need to fight them, but such people will keep coming. They will come for 4
years or perhaps 10 years but doesn’t matter.
Meet them. They are coming and you know they have not got their realization. The ones who have got their realization will
remain realized, but the one who has not got realization and they are going in and out, there is no need to get involved with them.
This I need to tell you today.
On them is the influence of the saints because they can’t do without it also. To drive away the bhoots and badhas only the saintly
people will work. Because you people can’t see and you cannot go to those worlds. So let them do this work. These people come
and say that they will keep working and will help you with your work.
They will not cure you or anything but they will do such work that they will work with others. They will drag people to come (in
Sahaja Yoga) and bring many more people who want to come.
There was such a person who had even written an article on Me. But someone scared him so he ran away. He was never going to
get realization. There was someone else who rose against Me. Then, after that, poor thing got stuck into his vortex, then another
thing started and he got stuck with it. So you should save such people.
Keep them in the company of saints and at least they will remain in morality and no bhoots and badhas will come to them and if
they have no bodily or mental sufferings and their brains will remain alright, because the saints do not trouble anyone, that is why
the saints should come into them.
But even the great souls are also hovering over you. They are also helping you. They too are helping and will help you with many
things: your body, mental, emotional will remain balanced and will see to your worldly affairs: they will look after your house: they
will look after your children. This is what these people hovering over you will do.
But you should completely [be] one with God. This is a great responsibility on you. Today I wanted that if anyone has any
questions then they want to discuss then please do so. Mr Shroff had ….
You have to be like a gardener in a garden. You have to see how to maintain this garden, how to plant it, how to move it, you will
have to think it all out. You think about it and tell how it can be done. One thing he said is right. He was saying that if we give
realization and we don’t follow up with it, then the realization gets lost.
If we, after giving it we don’t follow up and protect them we don’t look after them, take them forward and it can be that their
realization can be lost. And then it will again awaken and till then they will be in difficulties. And all should meet at least once a
month. Each and every realized person should meet once a month.
Make it such a way that every month a letter should go to each one. Or make a newspaper where you can distribute it and no
money should be taken. Do not give money anywhere or borrow money from anyone. Do not get involved with money. Even the
land the government gives for ashram never think that you will plant vegetables, then you are selling vegetables. There is no
need to get into such enterprises. We are not to earn money.

You must have read what happened to the Chairman of the State Bank. He went to the ashram and gave 90 lakhs there, 20 lakhs
were given elsewhere for making furniture. What a senseless thing to make furniture in an ashram. Please do not make furniture
and then sell it, otherwise tomorrow we will see that “These people are making furniture.” There is no need for that. It is
forbidden for you to do gardening. For this, there are many people.
You are here for a special work. You have to help in meditation, vibrations, and alleviating the suffering, and take time out to give
them realization and giving vibrations. And where it concerns money just keep far away. And take so much money, keep its
accounts, there is no need for it. If you get involved with money and its accounts, you will get caught up always.
Money and God have no connection. If someone gives you a place for free, then it’s fine, and someone who does not give it for
free, then that fine too. It is all God’s work. If someone gave you a place to sit, then he was God’s man who gave it, and if you
didn’t get a place to sit, then it does not matter. No one becomes God with a position.
There are many ashrams. Don’t put your attention there. That we are going to do this or that, or do business in an ashram, I will
never let such a thing happen. And when I see that you are stuck in some business then it is not My responsibility. You have to
do no business whatsoever. You have not to collect money in any way, for nothing at all. One person said to me that he will sell
My photos and then that money he will give to the ashram.
I said, “Which ashram? What money? Who said so? Why do you listen to others?”. There is no need to worry about all this. The
One who is doing and looking after us is Him. We are not doing our work. We are doing His work. If He wants, He will give and
doesn’t want to, He won’t give. And the same work we do night and day of eating ‘filth’, and if we are going to come here and do
it, then it’s of no use. Don’t give Me ideas like this, because two or three have given and I am very pained.
Please do not give these kinds of suggestions. That way I am very straight and innocent but this way I am very clever. I am not
going to come into these tricks. I am telling you this beforehand, that if you try to trick Me into money matters, I am not going to
get conned into it, whether you get realization or not. It does not concern me at all. You must realize that there is no connection
between money and realization anywhere.
The other thing is that there is no connection to politics with this. There will such people who will come to you who will say to
you to stand for elections as you have such a large following.
If you want to go into politics then you do that, but politics has been created by humans and not God. The one who stands with
the Divine has nothing to do with politics and government. You must understand this first. And there is no connection with your
position. If you think that you are a very big trustee or someone who thinks I am a very big secretary or a big chairman – “I am a
Chairman” – then there is no connection with any ‘chair’. And neither is there any throne or seat.
Remember this first of all. And nothing to talk about it. It has neither seat nor throne. There is no seat. Understand? There is no
need to make a special seat (in the future). Who is sitting on Adi Shankaracharya’s seat now, someone who is non-realized, so
nothing doing. Nobody is going to sit on any seat. All are sitting on their own seats. When we sit on someone’s seat we are afraid
of losing that seat (position).
By sitting on your own seats and ruling over your own selves from your own seat, then a lot will be done. Just tie a knot of these
things I have said and remember them.
The third thing that, a good character, good conduct and purity, without this you cannot rise. If you have some bad habits you will
have to make an effort to leave, take this vow on My feet.
Actually, it is this, that now you have shakti within you. Indians have a very bad habit of criticizing others. We are now connected
with love. We are all brothers and sisters. If something has happened amongst each other, can be that someone’s foot slips,

then it is not necessary that you go and discredit him all over the world. Come and tell me about it.
But you should put in all efforts in if necessary for saving your brothers by giving up your life for your brothers and sisters. For
that whatever you have to do, we will have to save him. It is a moral responsibility. It does not mean you have to pay money for
that.
Do not lend any money to anyone. If someone asks for money don’t give a penny. There is no need to lend money to anyone. If
some person, in his spiritual life, where his Kundalini is being destroyed or falling then help him. If someone has got into some
bad habits then all of you should make a chakra with one’s love to help out.
Till the Purity does not come into us fully, our work will be left incomplete. You should know this that the eyes of the whole world
are on you. By lighting diyas celebrate Diwali with this. People do not have their sight on a house, but on the lamps that burn.
The people’s attention is on you, in sense, they are watching that those who have got realization and are curing many sicknesses
in the world, how are they leading their own life. Sometimes you criticize this one, criticize that one. Though I have not seen such
criticism. At this moment such negativity has not come. But it can be. If there is anything, just come and tell me.
No one has perfect as yet. So come and tell me. I will cure that problem. And whatever failings (problems) you have, never feel
shy talking with your brothers and sisters. If you say that, “This is catching in me”, then it can be cleared. If you don’t tell them
how can it be cleared.
There is no need to feel bad as you know that all catch and all are doctors and doctors give free treatment among themselves.
So all of you can get cured free among yourselves. You must have brotherhood among yourself, and keep your attention on an
extremely pure life. So purity is very necessary. Without that nothing can be done.
If I had spoken about purity before, then it would be a question of perversion, that you clear out on one and catch another. You
clear out on the second thing and you catch a third thing. But after realization, this problem does not remain. After realization, a
hole (Sahasrara) has been made on top of the head from where everything will go out from here. You leave one thing and it will
go out from the top of the head. It will go out fully.
It will not enter anywhere else. That is the advantage of the hole that has been made here. If you have some habits you have in
keep it in your mind and then take it out from here. Wherever the habit is there, you feel heavy. On the Nabhi some like to eat a
lot. It does not look nice overeating. So pay attention to your Nabhi. From Nabhi then slowly remove it. Then everything will come
out from here, all the filth. Look at him. This gentleman told me that I can now take a breath from here (top of head). This is
good.
Watching your breath, watching, hearing, moving is all from here (Sahasrara). Everything happens due to consciousness, and
when consciousness has come on top of the head, then it will happen up here. The beating of the heart, the work of the whole
body is done from here.
So anything that you want to take out from within yourself, then just press it and take it out from here. It will release by itself. It
will all be released from here. Because there is now a hole, it is of great help. The hole was not there so… Like they say that if you
press the ocean on one side, it grows on the other. But if a hole is made in it then it will flow out. So, if you press it on the side, it
will not go to the other side.
Make an effort and look towards yourself as to what is impure within us. Like our Mother’s name is Nirmala, so too we have to be
Nirmal (Pure). And what is impure within us, and not within others. I was watching that some were looking at others. No, no, I
mean what is within us. Which “Hum” [Spirit] is it? What is it that is within us? These are our misidentifications, means that we
have thought of ourselves as Christians, we are Muslims, we are Hindus and the rest are useless.

This is a misidentification, “We Indians are the best, and the rest are useless”. These all are misidentifications and all are false.
There is just one truth that we are humans. That is the reality. First thing is, if you know this answer, then you will understand the
rest that you are. One must keep watching all your misidentifications at each moment. What are we thinking at this moment?
We are thinking that I have to go home and make food. Some are thinking that tomorrow is the office. What will happen in the
office tomorrow? People are thinking about various things, and I know what all they are thinking about.
You should listen to My lecture in Thoughtlessness. Not with these thoughts. The One who cooks for us is sitting here. We do
not make food. Think about this once that such a miracle has happened, that just sitting here you have become thoughtless.
Because matter is also made from that Conscious Power. See this. The Cook is sitting. Such questions will get answered. As
soon as you go into Thoughtless awareness you will understand that you have come under the protection of God, and in
thoughtless awareness, His light has come into you.
If you have any questions please ask Me now as a lot of time has gone for meditation. Next time we will have meditation. And at
this moment let us have a puja by which you will be specially given a Protection by which no problem comes to you. There are
many devils roaming around outside and you can get into trouble.
After this, the program is in Pune. Those who want to come to Pune they can come, but try to attend this two -week program.
Now, what I have said, just think about it. Now with My lecture, you will not get conditioned. Your conditionings will also fall
away. The greatest benefit of realization is that nothing will now stick to you. Its gross will not stick to you, only its conscious
may stick.
Even if I speak in Urdu, Farsi or French, but the conscious Power that is flowing through the words that will come into you. So
with this, the vibrations will flow into you, even if you don’t understand the language. The love that is flowing from within is what
is touching you. Like you may not know the name of the flower, but the fragrance is flowing into you.
The fragrance is the Consciousness and the flower is the name. So, even if you don’t understand the name, the fragrance comes
through. Each human can smell it and he can tell even if he is English, French or Indian. Everyone knows. There is no need to
speak about it.
So, in the same way, God’s fragrance which is the consciousness Power can flow into anyone, whatever may be his language, “It
is different to what I wanted to say, and what I wanted to give is different, that has got established inside.” And any problems
that were inside will be taken out from here [Sahasrara]. A churning goes on inside, and whichever thing the chakra is blocked
take it out and get rid of it, throw out it.
Some may get a heavy head, If you are catching from someone, don’t worry even your heaviness will also go out with it. Like I
said yesterday that take out with the left hand.
If anyone wants to ask questions please do.

1973-0910, Public Program, Bholapan, Innocence
View online.
10 September 1973
Public Program
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - VERIFIED
Public Program
I told you in My earlier talks that the first thing required in Sahaja Yoga is love. A person, who cannot love, cannot go deep into
Sahaja Yoga. And I told you a little about love also. After that, I told you about purity. A person who does not have the feeling of
purity cannot get into Sahaja Yoga. Since ancient times, the feeling of purity have been there; I have said this only after taking
that into account.
Today I have to tell you the third thing, especially for the Realised people, that Realisation is our new birth. When a child is born,
you see any child, it may be of any nationality of the world, Japanese, African, American, there will be one thing in all, that is
innocence. The specialty of the child is his innocence. That is why a person is called Realised only when he gets completely into
innocence. Anyway, the very clever, very shrewd, and those who have great intelligence and are skilful in cheating thousands of
people and telling lies, such people are totally worthless for Sahaja Yoga.
That is why, those who have been cheated and those who have been troubled, are most suitable for Sahaja Yoga. In the world,
they may not be reputable, but in Sahaja Yoga, they will be very reputable. Innocence is a big gift. A man gets it from the
accumulated wealth of many lives. You will see that while many old people are very innocent, very naive and very
straightforward, and many small children are very shrewd and sly. In these times, who takes a money by cheating someone, is
considered a celebrity.
To give an example, we had a relative, we went to their house and he thought he was a great man, very knowledgeable and
shrewd. And his wife was illiterate. He does not think much of her. He says, "She is a fool and she will rob me of all my money".
He was a first-rate miser. We went to their house. He started telling us with pride, "This land and this house, I have taken on lease
for forty years, thirty years back and I am just paying a rent of one hundred rupees only. This land is in my custody and no one
has the guts to lay his hands on it". He is sitting in a relaxed manner. He does not go anywhere; he has usurped acres of land and
laid his claim on it. And he was saying,”My wife is foolish. I have difficulties because of her. I do not know how many buildings I
would have owned by now. Now I am residing in a rented house". He had no qualms about abusing her. But in relation, he was
my older brother-in-law, so we kept quiet, what could we say? After that, his poor wife heard him quietly and walked into the
house.
In the meantime, a man came. He started saying, "Look, I have come on behalf of the home owner and the landlady was saying
that ‘you have so many tamarind trees, she likes the tamarind of these trees immensely. Saheb, I will give you two rupees, and
you give us some tamarind". He got angry, "What do you think? How can you get tamarind for two rupees? We will give you some,
if you give five rupees". He created a scene. Then he told his wife, "Beware, this man should not climb the tree, and tamarind". He
is staying in his house at a rent of Rs 100. the ladlord is making a loss of at least three to four thousand rupees. Look at his
wealth! He can afford to pay. Now he started saying, "A law is being enacted. This house will become mine. I am going to usurp
it. We are waiting for that".
Anyway, when the man was leaving, his wife called him inside. She started saying, "Whatever tamarind you have been asked to
get, pluck it". She then took a five rupee note and gave to him. He said, "Why are you giving me five rupees? I have to pay you
instead". She said, "Brother, you climbed in and out in the hard work. Five rupees for that. Convey my regards to her. Go! Take
these! Run away! If you need more come back tomorrow, come after twelve, when he goes away". Then he replied, "I was waiting

for him to leave so that I can pluck tamarind. I know you".
And he thinks he is clever and smart. And all laugh at him, He is an ass! This way such intelligent and those who think there is
smartness in being clever, shrewd and telling lies, they will remain where ever they are and such people cannot get into Sahaja
Yoga. And if destruction starts tomorrow, they will be chopped off first and innocent man will always be saved. An innocent man
has a speciality.
I am Myself very innocent, many people tell Me. In My house, all are annoyed with Me, with My innocence. It so happened, one
day, we were in Delhi at that time. It is an old incident. We went to the market. A helpless fellow walked to Me and started telling
me,’ I have got a lot of injuries, and I do not know what to do, how will I live?’ I said ‘Come, sit in My car’. We brought him home.
Since we brought him home, we dressed his wounds. Anyway, it was necessary to dress his wounds, I moved My hand around
him and the helpless fellow became alright. He started having great regard for Me.
And from morning till evening, if I got up at 4 am, he would also get up at 4 am and do all the work I was doing. But the people at
My house were very worldly-wise. They would say, ‘We do not know where he got his injuries, maybe he is a robber’. I said,
’Maybe he was, but now he has changed! There is so much change in his behaviour. Believe him and see '.They said, ‘No, no, he
should be handed over to Police, Police should investigate’.
Every day they were after him. My brother, My husband, and others were also there. They had a conference and said ‘he should
be in police custody’. I said,’ Forgive him once, see if he wants to rob, he will rob. If he does not rob, it will be good. What is there?
What great wealth do we have in the house?’ They were after him. One day we went for a wedding. He was made to sit outside,
not inside the house, they said, "He will rob, this will happen". I said, ‘Ok’. We wore our jewellery. We returned around 2 am. We
were tired. My husband also slept off. My brother also slept off. I also slept off. I kept my jewellery in the bathroom.
No one in the house thought there was a thief in the house. When we woke up in the morning my husband’s chappal (slippers)
were missing. My brother lost five hundred rupees. His shoes and coat were missing. His one box was empty. And all my costly
jewellery was intact, the ancestral jewellery, nothing was missing. He ran away with all their things, because he was a robber for
them. He left all my things alone and he was attracted to their things. They were saying, "This is surprising, we did not do
anything to him". I said, "You were after his life. Go to police, go to police. If only you believed him!" At home, have faith on your
servants too and see.
Believe and trust. We do not believe because we do not have a belief in ourselves. Believe everyone in the world. As much as we
learn to trust, the others will reciprocate your trust. One or two in a million may cheat you. No one succeeds in cheating Me. Even
if he wants to cheat, he cannot cheat. You should not cheat. What do you get? Only a few rupees! By cheating what do you get?
Which treasure? They get a treasure of sins. Here many try to be clever with Me. They try to teach Me with this and that. I am very
innocent , but also very astute inside. I do not fall into anyone's trap. It is difficult to take Me for a ride.
Someone may say this and that, I won’t fall into the trap. I am very simple. There is a reason for that. The reason for this is that a
realised person and who has control of his attention, he does not get involved anywhere. If you try to act smart with Me, the
Divine will deal with it on the spot. If someone tries to be clever with Me, he will be dealt on the spot. I will give an example of
this.
Ramakrishna Paramahansa and his wife were passing through a jungle. She was simple. While passing through the jungle it so
happened that Ramakrishna had gone ahead and she fell behind. The thieves thought we have a woman here, let us catch her.
They started following her. She said,’ Brother, it is good that you have come. Your son-in-law is ahead and I am left alone.
Anyway, my brother is here, my father is here, this is a very good thing that happened to me. There will be some rest for me.
Otherwise, I was wondering how I will find the way. What is your name? You are my brother. You are my father’.
They said, ‘We were to kidnap her, but she made us brother and father.’ They were moved by her simplicity and innocence, they
took her home and treated her like their daughter and Ramakrishna like their son-in-law, throughout their lives. Even thieves and

robbers recognise love. Snake, tiger and jackal, they all recognise love. Because the tiger does not eat its cubs, the snake does
not bite young ones. And if we become snakes, will the snake not recognise us?
Innocence always helps. He who is innocent is always helped in this world and I'll give you a modern example of that. One
gentleman was at the customs. He was very simple, but he used to talk a lot. Simple people talk a lot sometimes because you
don't have cunningness in them. They will keep to themselves or sometimes they don't speak, sometimes they speak. It's not
necessary that every simple person talks. Even clever people jabber a lot sometimes. In his innocence, he told this man, ‘I went
there, I brought this camera’. He is telling a customs officer!
He has come from the US and he is telling the customs officer, ‘I bought a camera of this type, does anybody want to see it and
he started showing. Here people hide cameras. Then he started saying, ‘I got a diamond ring from there. Does anyone want to
see it? Here it is’. He told with so much innocence, the officer thought he was boasting. He would not have brought it. It must be
glass stuff. He is making a fool of me. If he has really brought the original, why will he talk like this?
He said, ’You go now and don’t give me a headache. And another person comes hiding his things and looking here and there. The
officer will ask him, ’Come here, what do you have?’ Even otherwise, simple people are pitied upon. If someone troubles an
innocent person, he will receive so many sighs because of which he will forget harassing the person and if someone harasses an
innocent person, he'll have to pay for it in many lives. That is why an innocent man is the best. And if a person gets involved in
something, mostly you see, very often it happens that, if he is planning to do some mischief, he becomes serious.
I have seen such a gentleman, who had the habit of taking bribes. He used to tell my husband that you are a lousy type. You don't
know how to make money. He used to say this. But I've seen that if someone came to see him and wanted to talk about taking
money, he used to become serious. From being jolly, he used to become serious all of a sudden. You could figure out that some
talk of bribery is on.
I knew a person who was fond of going to cabarets. And whenever there was talk of a cabaret, he used to become serious.
Where to go? How to go? When to go? At other times, he will be laughing. He will plan meticulously and take it seriously and go
to cabaret. Why should he go to cabaret? If you want to be serious, go to a temple and sit there. No, he will not go there. A person
who used to laugh and who took life lightly, why should he be stupid like this?
An innocent person is also mischievous. His naughtiness comes from his innocence. Like he would spark things off. Like I told
you. One gentleman came to our house. He had a great hobby of going to cabaret dance. You may not know what a cabaret
dance is; there people dance naked. He could not talk about this to me because I was older than him in relation. In our house,
there was a senior Civil Servant. He was a naughty person. He told him, ‘take me there, I want to go there’. Now he was an elderly
man. He was mischievous. He took him to the police station in a taxi and he left him there and said,’ I will not come, you go’.
And he went in. When he went in and saw, all the police people were standing. He had come from a village. He did not know what
would happen. He thought police will be stationed at such places. That is why the police are here. When he went inside, the
police asked him, ‘what is your complaint?’. ‘No, I just came to look around’. They said, ’what?’ He said,’ Now you understand
what it is about.’ They said, ’what is the issue’? He said,’ Why are you having fun? I have come here for what it is meant for’? They
said, ’Then come we will put you in the lockup’. ‘Lockup?’ he said. They said, ’Who has sent you for the lockup?’ That way they are
made fools.
The tendency to run towards the subject makes a person cunning. Because to hide it, he becomes cunning. The tendency of
running towards the subject, makes him run towards it every time. After realisation, this gets corrected; you can see, ‘why are we
running towards it like a fool. Where are we running to?’ We can look towards us. We can see our foolishness. We can also play
with ourselves a little bit. We can be naughty with ourselves. We can play a lot with ourselves. We can see in which foolishness
we are caught up. An innocent man witnesses this play in a detached manner and says’ What strange state am I in, I can't
understand’. These are signs of innocence. An innocent man’s attention does not waver and he is in his innocence.

Like small children, if you leave them at a cabaret dance, you introduce them to a new person, they will start crying. They scan
them totally and they start crying. If you take a child to cabaret, he will cry loudly. You can try it. If you take 3-4 years old and a
balanced child, he will start crying- what is happening here? Look at children’s condition, if they see some insanity, or when they
do not understand what is happening, they start crying or staring at it wondering what’s happening.And the second thing, they
straightforwardly say everything. They never have any attachment, concealment or bad feeling. How ever they may be, they
observe everything.
Once someone said the person who is coming eats like a horse. The child heard that. He told his wife, he did not tell him. When
the guest came, the child kept looking at his face. After that, he said, ’Mummy, he is not eating like a horse, you were saying he
eats like a horse’. He did not feel, whether he is saying a good thing or bad thing, whether it will hurt. He just stated the fact.
Children understand the way a thing is being said, what is their mannerism. They imitate everyone, it is the habit of children.
The person who imitates is also innocent in some way because he can imitate only when he is a witness and if he can imitate
himself, then it is a big thing. He who can laugh at himself is the most innocent person. You do a foolish thing, laugh at yourself.
What is to be done, I have also done that. He who can say this, he can distance himself and look at himself.
You are also realised souls, you look at yourself, to see where you are running. You have a paunch; your hair has gone. Where are
you going? You do not have money in your pocket, how far can you look? What are you looking at? Where is your attention? He
who after taking realisation comes with devotion, finds himself in good company. He joins the company of saintly peopleHe who
does not want to go deep, he will look for excuses and fall in bad company. He will justify his moving in a bad company by giving
thousands of excuses.
Those who want to come, please ask Devale Saheb. Devale Saheb has to go somewhere. While he was walking, I found him and
asked him to come with us. He sat in the motor car and we left. He had another programme. He sat in the car and we went there.
We spent three hours there, because the enjoyment we were having here, we could not get anywhere else. But if you don’t enjoy it
fully, your attention will wander. ‘Where did you go today?’ ‘Went to the party’. ‘Why?’ ‘I had to go. It was like that, it was like this’.
Those who come here every day, what happened to them? They found the company of good people. Their attention does not go
towards subjective things, they do not get interested in such things.
The attention doesn’t get entangled in such matters. Instead it thinks’run, there is a programme, run!’ There is a congregation of
good people. The joy you get in the company, how will you get it there? So much is (UNCLEAR) coming, which can’t be seen. It is
not visible, but it is coming. It is showering on everyone, and we are pulled towards the power of God’s love…so much joy!
Whether Mataji comes or not, just. sit down. The joy you get in meeting another realised soul, it is so great. But if a possessed
person comes, then they run off from him. But those who are not fully into it, they are still running towards bhoots. Have to do,
have to see, have to meet. You do not have to go anywhere, do anything and you do not have to see anything.
If your attention is here, then you will feel obligated to come here. If you are an alcoholic, you will go to the pub, if you are a
realised soul, you will seek a good company. What is the point of going to any other place? If the embodiment of joy is here, what
is the point in going around other places? Every time they keep shouting at home, let them. Drunkards shouts all the time. they
squander money. ‘Don’t drink, don’t do this, don’t do that.’ Does he leave his bottle? If not in the house, then outside, if not
outside, then at a friend’s place.
Look at the person who plays rummy. If his wife shouts, he will go and play in his house. If someone shouts, he will play at the
beach. If the police catches hold of him, then he will go to some other place and play. He will not leave it. That is why you should
not get addicted.
If you get addicted, you will not enjoy it anywhere. You will talk the same thing, have the same thoughts, do the same thing, with
whoever he meets. People say, ‘we are bored with Shri Mataji’. But you are not going to get bored. You will say, ‘let's go and see’.
Whatever someone may say, you will say, ‘let us go there first. Other things later. We have got realisation. We have known it.’ And

you can change everyone at home. People at home will not like it until they get their realisation. It is nothing to be upset about,
you should enjoy it. You should not get angry with them, nothing to get angry about.
It so happened once that a person got angry with Me and said, ‘You go all the time. he started throwing things, so we also started
throwing things’. I said, ‘what is that? You have started collecting things, so I started collecting too. (UNCLEAR) ‘Look, you do
what interests you, I will do what interests me. Whether you stop me or not, I will have to go. Even if I sit here, My attention will be
there.’ When you enjoy it...for example,, take the case of a theatre-lover. If he does not have five rupees, he will go and watch with
a three rupee ticket.
Everywhere, you spend money to fulfil your desire. Here it is free to get your desire fulfilled. When you learn it new, how much you
enjoy it! Giving to others gives so much joy, you don’t find it elsewhere. People spend thousands of rupees. They will say give
donations here, donations there, they make a charitable committee. They will go to Bihar and give donations. They will go out to
Bangladesh and give donations. Charity is happening right here!.
There is a small child, he gets hurt. But nothing is going to happen to him. ‘Lagi nahin chhutey’ (Hindi saying meaning ‘once it’s
stuck, it can’t be undone’). It should first stick! It should stick to your tongue, but it does not. It depends on your mind and desire.
That taste should linger for a few days. The true enjoyment is in its depth and that will happen only when the person becomes so
innocent that whatever others may blabber, he is unaffected by it.. He saves himself through innocence. His innocence saves
him. A man becomes innocent only when he surrenders to Paramatma Because He does his planning. He is there to take care of
everything. Why is a child innocent? Because he is in the care of his mother.
We have more weapons to treat people. You know that there are many weapons. If someone is annoyed, use it. But first, you try
it on yourself. Maybe you are influenced by your mind. Your mind is explaining to you, ‘if not this, that, not this way’. When
everything is quiet, no cinema is screened in Mumbai, no partying, no wedding to attend, no guests at home, I think that such a
day has never come, even when all the eight planets meet! We will never meet that day. But you will get your realisation despite
this.
The desire to find the truthwill pull you inwards, and you have to look inside. It is there inside; without that, you are not going to
get your realisation. In your previous life and especially after My leaving…I am not going to go. I may go for one or two months.
Till I have the courage, I have the tenacity. See what happens now? .How many are there among you, how many are thinking of
this, that from my hand thousands are going to be emancipated, from my hand thousands are going to get realisation. We are
limited now, very few, but each one will grow in thousands.
Only today I spoke to Mr Bakshi (?). There is one Lakshman Ji Maharaj in Kashmir, a well-respected person, etc. I agree. He is so
considered, but like you, he is a self-realised soul. He does not know about Kundalini awakening; he does not know how to give
realisation. He does not know anything about these fingers. He is an educated man and is only self-realised got his realisation.
Even with that, he has established an organisation. In the world, people say, ‘meet him, meet him’.What are you going to achieve
after meeting him?Does he know about Kundalini awakening? If with these fingers, he can teach Kundalini awakening, I will do
whatever he says. But he is famous becausehe has established his organisation and is sitting with a flag…
Laxman Ji Maharaj. The entire world comes to meet him, the prime ministers meet him, take him here and there in the world, and
so he is sitting with a flag. If you are interested, I can tell you all about him, but you are not interested. Because from the signals
on your fingers, you can tell about his chakras. Ask him, if he can tell you about the chakras, then I will do what he says. If he can
tell about whose chakra is caught up where, or at least if the person is realised or not, I will do whatever he says. On seeing Me,
he could not tell if I am a realised soul or not. What further is to be said! Tell me after seeing Me, he could not tell whether I am
realised or not? Should we talk further? And you can identify or not?
After seeing him, I could see the history of his family from his father, grandfather up to many lives going back thousands of
years. And this great man has not recognised and the whole world knows him. Even in Mumbai, he is known, he is known in so
many places. And for those thousands of Laxman jis’, so many great people are sitting here, no one cares for them. Why?

Because they are worldly people. They are sitting in the world. But on the day, we think our world is everything, then the whole life
and everything is a waste.
Until you rise above this limited world and start looking at the whole universe and till you do not put your full attention on it,
giving you is a waste; I was thinking you are like a stone. Each person here is greater than a gentleman who has thousands of
followers. You can make out that from this that he could not know whether I am realised or not. Even a small child will say that I
am realised. There are thousands aftere him. There are also people, those who are not even Realised, not even awakened and
they are sitting with a flag. His followers raise slogans,’ This man is great’. If they are brought in front of Me they will be shivering
and exposed, nothing short of that. Even in front of you, they will be shivering and exposed. They are such people!
You just move your hand and you raise their Kundalini and check. You know it, that is why you have become naughty. An
innocent person knows everything, that is why he becomes mischievous. We see it here. You have become slightly naughty. Like
you play all pranks on others. What all the fun we have. How much fun we have! Like in Holi (a festival). But those who think they
are very intelligent, and those who think they are great people and those who say, ‘we have set up a post and we are saints’. You
don’t have to believe in such false things when you have the truth with you. You know from your hand. Once you have known a
person, the game is over.
If he is inferior to you, it does not make sense for you to bend before him, running towards him! That means that in your
realisation you do not pay attention to your mind. If you pay even a little attention to your mind, you will find that your mind is
after material things. It is in its mesmerism or its shine, in the artificiality. Because an innocent person does not know artificiality,
he likes his simplicity before everything else. There is no artificiality whatsoever. All the artificiality falls down. It is also
artificiality that we are something, we are such and such, Hindu, Muslim, all these are artificial. You understand what you are. we
are Atmaj (born from the soul), realised. We are all tied in one thread and at the cusp, we all smile together and we all cry
together. All at once. I tell people in the beginning, ‘come here, come here.’
One has to advertise even a pub initially. People announce banging on their drums, ‘come, come, alcohol is cheap here. Once
come and taste it, then it will be OK’. It's a question of getting a taste of it. All issues are solved. Ask a drunkard. I was surprised
to see very poor people drinking. Our servant, he drinks a little. He was to go to London with Me. They said, ‘You have no relation
with alcohol and he will get drunk’. I said, ’look, I can’t have alcohol in My house. He said,"Mataji, I will drink in London". I said,
"Then, you stay here". He said "It will be difficult for me to stop". I said, "I will help you stop, but you have to promise that you will
go with Me". He said, "It will be difficult. If You want, You take me, but I will drink there". He is a genuine person. I said, "It is not
going to work out, you stay here. It is straight forward. If you have to drink, you can’t come there. If you can control it". He said, "I
have no control over it".
The same way you would say that ‘I have no control. I am a different person now. What control do I have now? Now I will float in
this joy now’. Slowly, members of your household will also notice your behaviour. Those who are very miserly, they will realise
that they were worried about money needlessly. They will account for every paisa (one-hundredth part of a rupee), who took how
much and who gave how much. You will get a headache. Leave a few rupees, what will happen? Being stingy with a taxi driver,
but a realised person will just give it. Surrender everything to God. Gradually, a personbecomes so innocent- he becomes
completely innocent. Absolutely innocent.
Look at a small child. He is totally dependent on his mother, He cries when he is hungry, then his mother gives him milk because
he is dependent on her. The child who goes out of the mother’s care, they she would say 'you go and feind for yourself’. But a
child who is totally dependent on his mother, he is dependent on his mother for some time, and he has no worries. He will get his
milk on time. He will be taken care of. When the mother of an ordinary human can do so much, then the Mother of the whole
universe, the guardian of the whole universe, how much care will She take?
I told you many times, there is divinity in your realisation. Those deities, who take care of divinity, they take care of you. Deities
are with you. You do not know that, hundreds of deities hover around each of you; they are protecting you every moment. When
they notice that you are deceiving yourselves, they will leave you and run away; they are not going to stop. You will lose your

Divinity. Stoppage of Vibrations means losing Divinity. But where there are Vibrations, there the fragrance spreads. Deities come
there; they hover around you. As soon as the fragrance stops, they run away. Their job is to hover around you like the honey bees
hovering around flowers.
It is your job. Humans have to do it. Keep yourself in innocence, in simplicity and keep watching yourselfwhilst doing this work.,
‘What tricks am I playing? Tell yourself, ‘Hey mister, I have ventured out to play tricks!’ You will smile and say, ‘Ah, what trick I
have played!’ But at once the antidote to this tricky nature will be known. And you will know immediately about this and how we
can correct this habit of playing tricks. People come to Me and talk very smartly. I also act innocent and listen. ‘Keep telling Me.
What trickery will you show? What is that you can give to Me by talking like this?’ Anyone who tries to be smart and put a claw on
Me, is not going to succeed.
On the other hand, I am won over by simplicity and innocence. I will die for such innocent people. That is why I can lay down life
for an innocent man. And such a tricky person, who thinks too much of himself, one day he will know that the whole trickery has
filled his head. It all moves in a parabolic manner- it stays wherever it goes. If we trick others, then we get affected by it
ourselves. When a person tricks another, everyone knows who is tricking whom and they end up tricking each other. That is why
both of them have a fall. This type of trickery UNCLEAR. Where does all this trickery come from?
This trickery in us because all the time we are afraid. Here, there is no question of being afraid. If some chakra of someone is
caught up, we are not afraid. We clear it and we say, ‘now you check mine’. If there is chaos at home, we do not go and tell our
neighbours. We will hide it in the house, ‘This has happened to our daughter, please do not tell anyone’. Because we are afraid of
others. At most, we may tell our wives. If the other person has become one with you, then what is there to be afraid of. All are our
people.
Whatever happens, whatever fault we have in us, we make it evident, ’this is caught up, please clear it. Remove it.’ Now the catch
of Heart chakra, if you tell someone, ‘your Heart chakra is caught up, he will slap you on your face’. But if the Heart chakra of one
of you is caught up, you will say ‘Mataji, clear it, Remove it now. It has to be removed.’ Because whatever we take to be our fault,
which is in us, that I-ness is finished itself. We are…, these faults with our chakrasare not ours, because we are indestructible,
immaculate. Those are faults with the chakras. What is there to be afraid of in clearing the faults of the chakras? We are
indestructible, immaculate. We are standing alone. We are separate and these chakras are separate.
If there is a problem with the chakras, if we do not clear, another hand will remove it. when there is UNCLEAR, will the other hand
not know?? It will remove it. Such an innocent person…you are yourself so innocent, who comes and tells ‘this chakra is catching,
such a thing has happened to me’. This is innocence. Does anyone share his faults with anyone? No one will ever say I have
become a lunatic.
The day before UNCLEAR brain was caught up. He came to me holding it in his hand. He said,’ Mother, my head is caught up’.
Now also he keeps telling everyone, ‘my head is caught up’. It gets caught up. Sometimes the brain gets heated up. This should
not be construed as a fault. Because what we are, we are different from Aham (our self). These are two different things. Brahma
is different and we are seeing it and we are not that what we identify ourselves with, with which we have got integrated. But we
have integrated with that which is indestructible, immaculate, which has no blemish. He, who is most powerful in fearlessness,
knowledgeable, and is full of love, is within us.
A person who sees himself like this, why would he try to be tricky? He will never do it. A man who is cruel, small-minded, coward,
afraid, being looted by the whole world, only he will trick. He who stands like a king, who will he try to be tricky with? One who has
nothing to take, why will he try to be tricky? You watch yourself whenever you are doing something.
Sometimes people say, "Mataji, for You. we will pluck the moon and the stars". Go ahead, pluck, we have such a big sky. But
when it comes to doing, I observe that even for small things they slip away. For Me, it does not matter. All things move relatively,
not in absolute. It hooks onto something or the other. ‘Oh, I will do it if my son becomes all right’. Then you are gone. ‘Everything
in my house should be fine, then I will do it. When my daughter gets married, then I will come for meditation.’ You are gone. The

marriage will not take place and you will not come. There is a saying in Hindi ‘na nau man tel hoga, na Radha nachegi’ meaning
neither there will be 9 litres of oil, nor will Radha dance’ That’s it.
Such resolutions and options are made by the ones who are not fully enjoying their realisation. If this happens then I will do this,
what does that mean? That is there, that’s enough. Whatever there is is now, what you have to get it is at this moment, every
moment is for getting it. Every minute is for getting it.
And from a simple, innocent man fragrance flows every moment. Such a person is liked by everyone. Someone likes him
because he can be fooled. Someone likes him because he can be exploited by taking away some money of him. Someone likes
him because his company is pleasant, soothing. He talks sweetly.
Thieves and cheaters like children because they can snatch the chain from around their neck and stealthe girdle from their
waists. Thugs like children because they can sell them in the bazaar and earn money out of them. But a compassionate person
likes children because in their company you feel you are with flowers. With them you also become children, that is why children
look sweet. This depends on you. But the child does not change, be it for a thief or a compassionate person; he is fragrant for all.
Till such time he has the fragrance, nobody can rob him.
Till such time he has the power to get robbed of his fragrance, who can rob him? In this no one really robs. But one who loses his
ability to spread his fragrance, he will definitely be robbed through trickery. There is a lot of mental activity involved. There is also
a lot of ego. ‘Mataji said come there for meditation.I am the daughter-in-law of such a reputable family. How will I go there and
sit on the floor? There everyone puts their hands on my head.’ ‘You are the daughter-in-law of such a reputable family today.
What were you yesterday? Even after being the daughter-in-law of such a reputable family, you did not get the joy’. If you get joy
by sitting on the floor, then you should accept it. If you do not have this wisdom, then don’t come.
An innocent man does not have ego. He will not have ego at all. He does not know what ego is. You ask him to sit on the floor, he
will sit. You ask him to sit here, he will sit here. Ego never hurts him. If somewhere your ego gets hurt, you should know that your
realisation is a little raw. You are caught up, come here and show. ‘Mataji, this thing is caught up’. Even in the smallest things,
people's ego is hurt. Like I sat on a train, one person will sit here and one person there. He will say I was not seated close by. If in
such small matters, your ego is hurt, you should think that you are not fully established in your realisation.
Because you have seen Me. I do not understand anything, although I hurt the ego of many. But I am a complete fool. I don’t know
how to follow protocol. I don't know any protocol at all. And I will not be able to learn it, I should do this to him, I have to talk like
this to him, not talk like this to him. I sometimes hug a person and sometimes I scold a person. But till I have the power to love, I
am not going to lose anything. Because there is no bigger protocol than love that can teach. They are sometimes in amazement.
Recently I went there, they did not know Me. Her father was crying about their daughter. I hugged her. He was stunned, what is in
this Lady? They started crying here. Whatever is thought, is all trickery. What will they say? We think like this. Let them say what
they want to. Whatever I am, I will be. If someone says or not, nothing is going to change. Anyone may blabber something, by
blabbering does something change? Whatever you are, you are. But you should be truthful to yourself. Don’t lie to yourself. Don’t
play mind games with yourself. Don’t try to be tricky.
In reality, we keep cheating ourselves from dawn to dusk. Keep watching, what am I doing? When your mind says, ‘I am a big
cheat. I am cheating myself- I am a cheat and I am cheating myself’.
Today, nearly everyone has got their realisation. For a few people, it is blocked. When the vibrations stop, then to get them back,
you have found out the method. What you have to do to this photograph, how to give what and where. How to find which chakra
is caught up. Like if you are not getting vibrations in your hand, then check some finger or the other. From this, you should know.
Like this middle finger is Nabhi Chakra. This is on the Nabhi Chakra. Then this is Vishuddhi Chakra. Then this is Agnya Chakra
and this is Swadishthan Chakra.

This is your Anahata Chakra, which is on your little finger because it is fragile. And is most innocent. The one who resides in
Anahata Chakra, He is most innocent. The heart is very innocent. Believe it, He is not even conscious that He has given boons to
demons to trouble Him. But it is a fact, an innocent man is not conscious to whom He is giving a boon to. He has given his wife
to Ravana. If such innocent Bhole Shankara dwells in the Heart, who can cheat Him? You cheat Shri Shankara and take away his
wife, but then you will be in trouble. And whatever boon He gives, there is always a loophole that gets created due to his
innocence. He gives a complete blessing.
But in that, there will be one or the other loophole due to which the demon gets killed. You know in Narasimha Avatar, He had
given a boon. Once the demon got caught up, he was killed. Ravana was given a boon, he was killed. Kamsa was given a boon,
he was killed. Narkasura, Mahishasura, all were killed, after taking boons. This loophole is also part of Shri Shankara’s
innocence. And his naughtiness is in Shri Vishnu. That is why their combination works very well, Shri Shankar and Shri Vishnu. It
is a great combination. And till they are there, you don’t have to worry. Sometimes you go to Shri Shankara, sometimes you go to
Shri Vishnu.
It is a light thing, not a serious thing. Not serious, very light. Keep your mind very light, like a child. An airplane flies by, you look
there. Something else comes there, you will look there, at everything. An airplane flies by a thousand times. Whenever an
airplane comes, all children will run after it and say bye, bye. Seawater comes twice. Each time the water comes up, the children
will run towards it, greet and come back. Wherever there is a commotion, they run towards that place.
What I mean is that an innocent is close to God, that’s why he is innocent. He will not look special, nothing about him looks
miraculous, nor does he look intellgent and tactful, but he is clean-hearted. Such a person is best for Sahaja Yoga. The one who
is innocent, straight forward, simple and mostly I have seen that such people are geniuses and even scholars are innocent.
Sometimes their innocence and their innocent talk makes Me feel like they are small children. Such learned people talking so
innocently, sometimes I am surprised. Whatever knowledge they have got, they have got it from God. It is there in them because
of their innocence.
Whether they talk or not, that is not My point, but inside them, they have a jolly, playful world. Try to spend most of the time in the
company of children, not in the company of old people. Some 80-year-olds have become 18-year-olds! Be in the company of
those who are like children. And also keep your mind simple like children, it will be helpful in Sahaja Yoga, one will progress.
When children get their Realisation with me, I see that they have a lot of faith.
You know I have two grandchildren; both are Realised. Every day there is a fight, ‘I have to go for Puja with grandma’. I feel that
both of them will sit in My lap. It is better that I take them. After getting up in the morning, such small children, one and a half,
two-year-olds, keep their hands beneath My feet and touch their heads for half an hour, which child will do that without first
having their milk. They do not start the day without that, as if it is more necessary than milk. I have told the elder one about
Kundalini. Now she says, ‘put Your feet on Kundalini’, the younger one, as soon as I put My hand on her head, she sways like this.
Now if the maid gets hot vibrations,‘ go, fall at the feet of grandmother’, the elder one used to say. And they have dedication.
‘Grandma, please take us for Puja, grandma take us for Puja’, they keep pleading day and night. Small children who normally like
biscuits, chocolates, they do not want chocolates, they don't want anything, they want to come for Puja- It is like a child crying for
his mother, even if you give anything of this world; they are like that.
It does not happen by saying. It is not like my saying drink alcohol, drink alcohol. You will easily get into the mood for alcohol, but
you will not get into meditation. You will not get into meditation easily. Getting addicted to alcohol is easy. When you get into the
mood for meditation, I don’t have to say anything. That is why your desire is very important. Your has more value, it is
worshipped and that is why you have to desire, ‘God, let me have devotion towards You. Let me dissolve in You completely’ The
more and more one says this, steadily it will happen, it lives, it gets inside you, into your depths. He will grow in his beauty.

1973-1115, Kundalini Ani Sahajayoga
View online.
15 November 1973
Kundalini Ani Sahajayoga
Public Program
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Marathi to English) - NEEDED

1973-1117, Kundalini Your Divine Mother In You
View online.
17 November 1973
Kundalini Your Divine Mother In You
Public Program
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Those issues which are not at all there in animals are there in human beings. For an animal there is no question of any issue, he
just exists. He is not even concerned about the power which is behind his existence that, ‘which is the power behind my
existence’. The reason for that is the Chaitanya Shakti (vibratory power), which creates the whole universe, sustains it and
organizes it. It flows through living creatures and passes through them. Because of a particular reason in a human being and
because concerning of his particular way of life, there occur some developments by which he gets disconnected with that
power. In simple words you can understand that the ego which human beings have, animals don’t have. The condition of brain of
human beings is one of different kind. His brain is triangular.
When a foetus is of 3 months in his mother’s womb, at that time, this power enters through this triangular brain and then it is
divided into three parts because of the retraction involved in this process. One part has gone down directly through the middle of
forehead and remaining two parts go down through the two angles of the brain and take a turn and go down. It is because of
these three type of powers only a man is different from an animal. This power which passes in the brain through triangle and it
passes through one angle of triangle, then it also develops another angle. And because of that particular angle its powers
changes in two forms. If you people are from physics then you will understand that power always passes in a straight way. But
when it comes to this side passing through like this then it has to go like that, so it is changing form divides it in two powers
which are called as components. One goes outside like this and other goes down like that. It is only because of the force that
goes outside; man is compelled to get a feeling of going outside.
For example there is an animal, if he sits on a stool then he will think of sitting on a stool. But if a man sits on a stool then he will
think how I would maintain this stool, where did it come from, who has made this stool? Whatever he sees he gets involved into
it. If he sees any human being then he gets involved in him. This is not a case in an animal. He just lives. If his master comes
then he becomes happy. If any stranger comes then he starts barking. If any thief comes then he starts barking. He does not
think of having it or this mike I should take. I would get this table. It is called possession. It starts covering his mind. He has no
sense of aesthetics. He does not even think that there is something beautiful or ugly, its colour is good or bad. He is just not
bothered. But man gets involved in any particular thing. He goes further to start thinking that “I am something, I have my identity,
power, and I am something special”.
For example, we are born and we start thinking that, I am Nirmala; I am Hindustani (Indian).We are Hindu, Muslim, Christian. That
is how we get entangled with whatever type of outside identification we have. This type of tendency of going outside is there
because of brain of a human being is triangular in shape. If man does not go outside then, there would be no further problem. For
example cats and dogs have no question of any kind. The entire consciousness passes through them and goes downwards.
There is no question before them. There is no reaction in them. But such is not case with us. Whenever we look at anything we
have our reaction to it. Therefore it is just a reaction produced by a force which originates one from front and other from back
within us and two institutions, named as ego and super ego are formed and gathered here. Due to assembling of these, we are
separated from everywhere/ completely. We all are separated from the power which is present there, you are separated, you are
separated, and we all are standing separately. Actually we all are product to only one power. It is like somebody has filled petrol
in us and has removed from this side.
Out of this power, the power which go through middle , goes down and is settled in three and half circle in coils in the triangular
bone in our backbone after getting twisted. That’s why it is called as Kundalini. This power is not seen, that’s why many people

may ask that whatever you are telling how can we believe this. But it will be seen by you after reaching a certain extent. Like if we
would say that you can see many things with the microscope, which cannot be seen by these eyes. For this you should have
microscope. If you don’t get microscope you just cannot see that thing.
So a state comes where you can see this shaktis (powers), where it is sitting, how it is sitting, what is the shape? But this shakti
(power) is settled down in a formless state. When Kundalini is awakened those people who have come here and those who are
now Realized and the people who knows this work quite well can tell you that when your Kundalini gets awakened and if anybody
bows down before me then throbbing in the spinal cord of backbone is seen. You never breath from this area but you can see her
getting up and down here whether you are realized or not. It is seen in many people but not in all. But in those who have
obstacles, it is seen very clearly. You can see throbbing for a long time. This Shakti is hidden there and sited down there. But the
same Kundalini, which is there within you, since all your previous lives, is nurtured in you. She records all things like a tape- what
problems he has, this is my son, what are his problems he has in his body, which thing he needs. She knows each and everything
about you. Your mother may have many children but you are the only child of this mother (Kundalini). You are the only child. Ever
since I was born, I was observing that the Kundalini in each person is frozen just there. She just does not rise. What is the
reason? The rising path of Kundalini is fixed and she knows that I have to rise through this path.
There is a big space in between; here those who are doctors can understand that in this Void, which is in between vagus nerve
and aortic plexus, there is vacuum. In the same way, there is also a space in our sushumna nadi. Because of this space created
in all the human beings that Kundalini shakti is inherent. I was just not able to understand that this Kundalini shakti will rise, but
how. The found-out remedy to fill this gap is Sahaja Yoga. When this Kundalini shakti rises, then it goes upside and again it goes
up through this path and intermingles you with power which fills our vibrations. You see, it’s just like petrol. First, it was filled
within us then we used it. We have consumed it because of our outgoing tendency. Now to fill new petrol again, this cap has
once again been opened up. And for that person it is Kundalini which opens it.
From above, the Shakti (power) flows through you for whole time in the form of grace. When this takes place, at that time, you
will feel like there is some power flowing through your hands. Now it is surprising that from the beginning, ever since the power
of Chaitanya (vibrations) has been working, the gross power and Chaitanya (vibratory) power have been together. Like there is a
tree, inside tree is vibratory power, there is a light that is why it is being nourished. But you don’t see that. You are watching only
the growth of tree means you are watching the work of just gross power. It is the Chaitanya shakti (vibratory power) which
always runs the gross power, it regulates it and it does its work. But time it is seen for the first time when you are Realized. Then
there is manifestation of this. For the first time, it starts flowing through you when flow is opened from above and it start coming
from inside. Cool –cool vibration comes in hands. But you, yourself reach that state where thoughtless awareness gets
established. There is antarmoh (inner attachment). If there is any psychologist here, he can understand this, it is called Universal
Unconscious.
Any man or any person who has the cancer disease and from which he is very upset, and has come today may be to get Sahaja
Yoga, so that this disease can be cured. Those persons who are Realized they can never get the disease of cancer because they
know how to cure cancer. Many people say that there were great people like Maharshi Raman, who had cancer, Rama Krishna
got cancer. He got cancer, but there was nobody to tell them that how to cure it. Very few people have written about these
vibrations. And the biggest wonder is that only Shankaracharya has written about it. But those who claim themselves to be
biggest Hindus do not know Shankaracharya. Adi Shankaracharya has talked of nothing but Sahaja Yoga. He had just said,’ na
sankhen, na yogen’-God is not achieved either by sankhya or yoga, he is achieved in a sahaja way, spontaneously. The growth is
spontaneous and he had not made any caste. He had said that there were three kind of people in the world, the one who of lower
level, those who do not have much intelligence. Those who have not yet developed fully as a human being. For example, this
mike is not yet fully prepared as a machine, then there is no need to connect it to the mains either and there is no use also. It is
better that these types of people are remained in ‘bhakti rasa’- the essence of devotion.They are of no use.
Second type of people, are those whose minds run here and there. That is why they indulge in wrong things or they are stuck to
such work which make their energy exhausted. These types of people should get into yoga so that they should be able to save
themselves by yoga. But the third type of people who are such mild and are of such a pure form that this unique phenomenon

takes place in them. Now the only difference between him (Adi Shankaracharya) and me is that he used to say there that there is
one in millions and I say that there are thousands in millions. This is the only difference between both of us. It may be possible
that there used to be such people in sixth century but as of today I see there are thousands of them who are getting this thing.
You must have read a lot about the Kundalini awakening. If you have read those books you would have not come here. Because
there are such things said about Kundalini awakening that when it is awakened there are lots of —-burning wounds arises in the
body or there is heat. Some people say that person becomes mad in it and lots of other things. But here there is no happening
like this. But actually these people who call it as Kundalini awakening is not awakening of Kundalini but it is displeasing
Kundalini.
Since Kundalini is only awakened through the middle path from its place and if we try to awaken it somehow from other place,
then it will be a wrong act. It can only be awakened from the middle path if there is such a person who shares the love ,in the
form of vibrations of the whole God. Only that person can only fill the space, which goes in middle of a human being. In reality,
there are a few people like this, there were few. Now we will say that there are many who have become like this. Only these
people can be called Realized, through which the Chaitanya power flows. When these people who are realized – give Realisation
to you then you will not see any manifestation of kind people tell about Kundalini. It is only so-called phenomena that this type of
thing happens.
Now thousands of people have got their awakening in front of us. In Bombay, at least 10,000 people have got their awakening
and three to four thousand have been realized. But we have never seen any man enduring this kind of difficulty. Yes, of course,
somewhat resistance, as described by them, may occur because as we are loving you, some one might be hating you, and might
be residing in you. That surely may shake your body a little bit, may give you some trouble but that also get destroyed soon and
run away. Because when it sees that love is coming here then it also—-? Like how the darkness run away after seeing the light.
That also run away. But so far now we have not seen any man getting pimples or abscess in him or he has gone mad. It is true.
Just a few days back we went somewhere. There was a gentleman who was sitting pointing his legs towards me. He was told
not to sit like this. Then he replied that kindly allow me to sit like this otherwise I will jump like a frog.
Somebody asked him, ‘why’ then he said ‘my Guru has told me that when your Kundalini rises then you start jumping like a frog.
Then we told him that you have not yet got your awakening. And the working out of your awakening is very difficult. Because in
the central channel of sushumna nadi, there is a space. And apart from that there are two other nadis built within us which are
called sympathetic nervous system. We call them Ida and Pingala. Because of exhaustion of these nadis only all things do
happen. And whatever work you do in the name of God, that time that heat comes in you. In other words, if you put on a heater
without filling it with water, then what will be the condition of it (heater). First let there be flow of water of love. Unless and until
there is addition of water of love in it, it cannot work. In the same way, when we try to do anything or act in the name of God
without achieving him and his power, that time our sympathetic nervous system starts running either on Ida or on Pingala. By
movement of either nadis, by increasing your acting power, your power gets exhausted.
If your Ida nadi runs excessively then you may get terrible disease like cancer. What you call as over activity. And if your Pingala
nadi runs excessively then your conditioning will increase. All the things what you call as ‘bhoot’, ‘badhas’, will enter in to you.
Both of these activities are considered to be prohibited. But when you become just that then you just do not act. Like a mike,
what it is doing except for it is enabling my voice reach up to you. In the same way you become a hollow thing. You become a
hollow personality through which this power flows on its own. Because of this hollowness, Kundalini residing in you gets
established. Kundalini is your mother. Mother is already sitting in you. It means that you are already sublimated. Many people
say that we have to sublime sex, it is a very absurd thing. You are already sublimated. You have no question of sublimation. You
are already placed somewhat higher and those people who have this kind perception they are themselves insulting their own
mother. And this is why in these people Kundalini do not rise but surely her anger, the anger of Kundalini start running on your
sympathetic and suffering from excessive heat people get mad.
You must have heard of Kriya, yoga, etc. there are similar things which people do. Now there are people who do jap-tap(ritual –).
Jap-tap is also a thing of outside. You cannot do anything in the name of God. To the extent you can say that you cannot do any

living work. Man in his illusion thinks that ‘I do something’. Cats and dogs do not think that way. We can only do what is a dead
work. For example, when a tree falls you make piller out of it and evet it. All the dead things not a single thing is living. Electricity
and light, etc all these powers that you know are gross power. None of these is a living shakti. You just cannot do any single work
means that you cannot make a fruit out of a flower. You cannot make a tree out of a seed. But man remains in illusion and thinks
that ‘I do everything’. But you cannot say that you do not do anything in front of the one who does millions of work. If you wonder
that there is a heavy magnet which is very powerful and in front of that you are just a small magnet. What can you do to pull that
towards your side, except that to finish the magnet in you? Just this is the job.
A human being just cannot do anything and he does not. He is in illusion to think that he does. Because there is manifestation of
ego and super ego. This manifestation creates an illusion in human being that he has to do something. In reality, God has made
you for his own. We are image of god. For example the power which is flowing in us that is being worked out through these
fingers. All these fingers are seen to us in a form of body. It means gross we are in his gross form which want to work out
through us. That is in the form of shakti. He knows all the things. He does all the thing. He does all the planning. He knows
minute to minute things. But he is formless. He is working out within ourselves in form.
There is no fight between Form and Formless. When you come to Kundalini then you will be surprised to find that no religion has
any fight against any religion. Yes, if there is a-dharma then there will be. Jesus has once said that those who are not against me
are with me. How great thing he has said that those who are not against him, are not against Chaitanya, are all with me only. This
you can see in your Kundalini that your Kundalini revalues in God knows how many rounds. You might be in your previous life be
a Muslim, at least it should be acceptable to those Hindus who believe in previous birth. It is possible that you might have been a
Chinese. The thing that you hate might be what were in your previous life. Because that time you used to hate— so it is possible
that you have now got what you did hate – this is not to be case—
Even if you are theistic or believer, God is there. By believing him or not, he is not going to get erased and after all who are we to
erase him. If this finger believes or not, there is powers in it. It does not matter to him and to believe him or not it does not mean
anything. All it needs is that the power must keep running through it, the one who is connected to brain. Whatever it is telling,
whatever it is creating to do through it, it should keep doing that only. In this case there is a beautiful example of Shri Radha.
There are many worshippers of Shri Radha that is why I am willing to talk of Shri Radha.
Once, Shri Radha got jealous of the flute of Shri Krishna. She asked Shri Krishna what is so special about this flute that you
always keep this flute near your mouth. Then he replied that you better ask this question to flute itself. She went to ask flute that
what is your speciality that you are always attached to his mouth. Then the flute replied, ‘Oh, mad, you do not even know that I
have nothing special, that’s what is my speciality. I have become totally hollow. That is why he made me play. If ever I stand then
his whole melody will go in waste. I have become completely hollow. Then Shri Radha asked Shri Krishna that you make me your
flute in my next birth.
In the same way we have become hollow. But by becoming hollow does not mean that you would miss doing your job. Many
people say that they have no responsibility. In reality there is no responsibility of yours. But people say that we do not have any
responsibility. Because they are sitting in misunderstanding(are all confused). Like we are sitting under this roof and these
pillars are supporting this roof. But if any senseless person is there, he will unnecessarily hold it by touching the pillar. But the
one who is sensible knows that there are pillars to support the roof. Then who are we? In the same way till there is ignorance
man thinks that he is going to do all things and such work to be done (not understood clearly). And if I get into this trouble then I
will become Sadhu-sanyasi, saint, etc. and I would not be able to do any work.
In reality, you cannot do otherwise also unless and until you are beyond thoughts and because the power inside you is so unique,
so deep and so powerful that as soon as that start flowing in you, there is addition of glory to you, in your conversation, in
everything you show skill/excellence within you. People will be amazed to see how did it happen. Now here is Miss. Maniklal. I
am telling her example. That since she is realized after her awakening, from her writing such things are coming that she herself
says that I think, I am just not writing, what is happening. Those people who could not even write a simple poem, after this
(Realisation) they start doing such and such poems. There was a girl, simple artist absolutely simple. She used to play with

colours sitting in her home. After that when she became realized, there began the exhibitions of her work and she earned
millions more.
You imagine if there is a politician, the time when he become a witness, then he could see whole thing and apart from that when
you are there in his refuge, when you believe in him completely, his thousand hands are there around you. Angles start hovering
you. You do not understand how the things are being worked out, how people come, how things are being done, how things
come around end/ how the entire work has been done. Such wonderful things start happening that a man gets surprised that
how things have worked out, how that thing has worked out.
But the vision of man must not be on that, what we will gain out of it. Many people say that kindly awaken our Kundalini so that
power will come in us. In reality you become completely powerless because your Kundalini becomes powerful. The power of God
gets flowed through you because you are surrendered to him becoming completely powerless. The essence of whatever has
been described in all the religion is only one and is to know thyself and to know this there is only one way that is Sahaja Yoga
which may be called as spontaneous growth what happen spontaneously. Buddha only got it from Sahaja Yoga. He was
wandering thousands of places here and there and one day while he was laying — getting tired his Kundalini said that my son is
too much tired, somehow to give him Realisation. That very moment the rays came down to his head and stopped and from
below the Kundalini strike down his Sahasrara and got his Realisation. Nobody has ever got Realisation — Sahaja Yoga.
The only thing is that for example to come to 4 Dupley lane we had to go to Hazrat Ganj, then we left that place in Delhi. Then we
left here Lucknow to shift to Delhi. The all had roaming in Delhi, went here to there, then somehow from that place people told us
that Gentleman, this the same thing. He is sitting in you, where are you going to? So we — us going here and there then went to
Japan and then to China then after travelling there met here. There was a mess in that travelling that ap— caught hold of. But the
one who has got it he is mostly established in a Samadhi. The best example of this is Shri Gyaneshwara when his Kundalini was
awakened he wrote the sixth chapter then he got his awakening and when he was realized by that time h is Gyaneshwari was
completed. That time he took to Samadhi. Because when you got it then your entire quest is w—less. This is what ——————– so
better take Samadhi. The entire quest is lost but nothing is lost. As soon as a man starts seeking he reaches to a condition in
which he has to get, receive Kundalini along with firm standing re—everything. A man first seeks in money; seek in possession,
after that he says that there is nothing in this junk like what is in America. Then his Kundalini says —- and he gets his birth. Then
he seeks power, he wastes it then says what is there in it. Then he seeks in religion (dharma is also outside). All our religious
m—gone out, nobody knows the religion of inside. The entire thing is that of inside. But the methods are of outside. That is why
he seeks outside; in religion also he makes Guru, makes friendship, goes to temple asks for God. But the essence of all the
religion is to get it. Those who are realized, all such Gurus like Guru Nanak; he says that, ‘sahaja Samadhi lago, sahaja Samadhi
lago’. He says,’ why to go to forest when all is residing he is within us’. Just like that God is also- seek within seek within.——-?
Now, we are singing, we cramming, ‘Ghat hi khojo bhai’ (meaning seek within, seek within). It is just like if a doctor has
prescribed Anacin for your headache and you are cramming, ‘take Anacin, take Anacin’, but when will you take it? If the patient
will not take it, then how his headache will go. By seeking within means that to get established inside, to get lost in it.—–28.35 It
happens spontaneously when your time comes/arrives and time of thousands of people has come. All those of who are sitting
here you know your previous birth; it is the seeking of thousands of years which has brought you here. Because of that you got
your own right. We are just not doing anything.
For example you go to a bank and you get your money by giving your cheque. They have to give you money, otherwise where will
they go? If we do not give you your Self-realisation where will we go? We have to give, because it is your fundamental right.
Whatever you do, you do it in your authority. If you don’t have desire, unless and until you have that authority, no work will be
done without your desire. But one thing we must understand that are we coming from the real or unreal. Your Kundalini knows
you. She knows all of you, everything about you. But she respects your freedom that when in your freedom the day when you
decide that we want absolute that very day your Kundalini will rise, your Sahasrara will open, we do not want anything else. We
have to ask only the absolute thing. We do not want anything of body and nothing else. We know ourselves in the refuge of the
same Almighty Father, Paramatma (God), Parmeshwar. The one, who have decided it, has become realized. If you have any
question about your Kundalini you may ask me. The subject of Kundalini is very large. There are two to four people who have

come with us and are such realized that they have reached a state where they give Realisation to others. Once you are realized
the Kundalini dances through your glances, through your glances. You yourself will realize it you will raise the Kundalini of
thousand people just like this.
These are very simple type of people, normal people. You will not come to know about their power that how powerful they are.
But just by their one glance their Kundalini will rise and these people will become realized. A very big task can be achieved when
thousands of such people are ready. And a new lane will be ready, a new type of people, a new type of institution, those who have
achieved it from within, not from the great hypocrisy, not by money. Those who have got it only from inner distress (aartata) and
their dedication towards God, their age will not be less than 90. The one who in witnessed state, whatsoever is lane be, however
power he has, but he never gets his ego. He will not have ego because whenever he gives he says that it is going through me, this
is happening, they are not being worked out, they are worked out. Even if it is your son, you cannot say that he has become
realized. When he gets it, then it is known that it has been done. Such vibrations start coming from inside. You also get
vibrations. And if you say forcefully, kindly give Realisation to such a fellow then it is just not possible. No recommendation can
be considered. No politics can be considered, no pressure can be considered, no relation, no money can make it happen.
Whatever falsehood which can be called as myth cannot hold it. Truth is what it is, and it works out. Any work, any program, any
method cannot change it. It works out automatically.
But still you should keep an eye on your mind that an ego in human being is so gig, so subtle, as soon as I say that there is
nothing to be done he gets shocked (dazzled). If I say that you stand on your head then he does it. But the thing, which is free to
get and which is achieved without any effort, human being just don’t believe. Because he has a great faith in his ego and he does
not know ego of God that if he moves his finger he can change the vision of the whole creation and if he wants that he can lit the
lamp in the small-small particles of this creation.
If you have any genuine questions then ask otherwise we will experiment by going in slight meditation because unless and until
there is experience till that time all the conversation remains a mere conversation and what is there in conversation.

1973-1119, Sahaja Yoga
View online.
19 November 1973
Sahaja Yoga
Public Program
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
[Introduction in Hindi for 50 seconds.]
Yesterday, we discussed the existence of Kundalini, your divine mother in your being, which is born with you. Every time we take
birth, it is with you. It records all that you are.
Today, we will discuss Sahaja Yoga. This is a name I have given, as people call it, but actually, it is not my name. This name has
been used by many sages and many seers and even by Shri Krishna. ‘Sahaja’ is a Sanskrit word. It means, ‘saha’ is ‘with’. ‘Ja’
means born. ‘Yog’ has two meanings. ‘Yog’ means ‘union’. It is the union, or we can call it, re-union. And also, it has another
meaning. ‘Yog’ means deftness. An expert with deftness in his job. It also means 'kauzalya' [unsure], as they call it. But the real
meaning of ‘yoga’ is that after the re-union with the All-pervading Power, with your own awareness, you become deft in the art of
religion.
This is a real religion of yoga. And there are various schools of yogas. For example, there is Patanjali Yoga, which discusses and
explains how we can build up a mental and a physical side of your life. There is Satya [unsure] Yoga and various yogas which are
described by different seers and philosophers.
Now, Sahaja Yoga, is a yoga which integrates all the yogas, which covers all the knowledge of the world. It covers all the aspect
of religion and all the religions and all the prophets that have been and that will be. Because Sahaja Yoga is the system employed
by nature itself, by the Divine itself, by God himself, whether you call it God or anything. It is awareness I am talking about.
Whatever is living, as you have seen, lives by itself, spontaneously, grows by itself. No amount of effort can make a seed grow.
You may stand on your head, you may do Patanjali Yoga, you may read Satya [unsure] Yoga, you may read any yoga whatsoever,
nothing can manifest, if it is living, without the spontaneity of awareness.
Actually, human beings do not do anything that is living. They do everything that is dead. That is, when we change the form of
dead, from one to another, we say we have created matter. We have not. Matter exists; we just change the forms. Sometimes, we
get a thought from within, spontaneously, and we note it down. We think we have done it. It is not so. It has come to you from
somewhere, which you have just noted down. What human beings can do is to read some books and reproduce them. But if they
have to produce anything original, they have to depend on the spontaneity of their awareness. The more you are aware, the more
you are spontaneous.
Even Einstein, such a great scientist, in his introductory chapter, he says that, “I was trying to search out the methods to explain
the relativity and the hypothesis that I was carrying on. I was so very tired that I gave it up. And I was sitting in a garden, playing
with soap bubbles”. Now this is his sentence, “Then, suddenly, from somewhere unknown, the theory of relativity dawned upon
me. Method was done”. It just comes to you. You cannot achieve it. That's why, in the Bible, they call it 'revelation', it just reveals
itself. That's the correct word. So, even whatever abstract you try to communicate to human beings, which is living, is not done
by us. But in all ignorance, human beings believe that they are doing everything. And that is why we have tensions and problems.
Once we know we are doing nothing, we are just a tool in the hands of the Divine, only thing we must surrender ourselves to the
whims of the Divine, and to the play of the Divine and become a hollow personality, we will know that all the problems so far do
not exist. Because our attitude changes anytime [unsure].

Psychologists have described awareness, the later one, I should say the latest ones, have really been able to locate various
points of awareness. But as all our scientists are, they are not integrated. Because when the psychologists also try to explain the
awareness, they do it with their limitations of ego and super ego. For example, I want to explain about this hall and my eyes are
blind. What can I explain but that there's a pillar? I can feel it and I can say there was a serpent hanging here out.
Yogis also have described about their experiences in the same manner. Their knowledge, I do not think, has been so complete to
explain all the aspects of awareness. And half-knowledge is the most dangerous thing. That is why certain yogis like Patanjali
Yogis, describe that you must do yoga. And with yoga, you can achieve good health. But they did not know what are the effects
of the yoga asanas on the Kundalini and on the achievement of Self-realised state. Actually, human being is one identity. And
every scientist and a seer and a psychologist are seeing them in different angles. And they have not been able to put them
together. Nor have they been able to keep their vision that wide as to see that, after all, the ultimate aim of a human being, is
Self-realisation. All these sciences must lead to Self-realisation.
If you read my speeches that they have given on Sahaja Yoga, you will know that by putting any effort, we act on our sympathetic
nervous system. I mean the exhausting system. For example, the 'petrol' is built from here, into our being when we are small
children. Then our head is blocked, we become a separate identity. 'Iness' is developed, 'I', "Hama" [particular personification]. 'I'.
Now with this little battery that we have we are exhausting it by using our sympathetic nervous system. All the doctors know that
when we work or do anything we work with our sympathetic nervous system. For example, when we want to increase the
breathing, we can do that. Because it is sympathetic nervous system, we can bring into play. But supposing I ask you to reduce
your breathing rate you cannot do it. Same with the heart. You can get into tension but you cannot relax. This is done by
parasympathetic.
You ask the doctors what is parasympathetic, they'll say that it is an autonomous nervous system, finished! It's an autonomous
nervous system they have given a name that should be satisfying for all of us. And we don't know what to do with that. But if you
tell the doctors that, “Sir, it may be that somebody knows about the autonomous nervous system, would you like to have a look
at it?” They’ll immediately say, “Can you prove it scientifically?” It can be proved scientifically if people are willing to sit down and
listen. But the person who wants to tell about it may be just a housewife.
It is absolutely scientific that parasympathetic nervous system can be controlled by human beings themselves. The autonomous
nervous system can be controlled if you know how to control the ‘auto’. And they call it “svayam’ channel. What is this ‘svayam’?
What is this ‘auto’? If we can some way or other be that auto, we might be able to control that autonomous nervous system, by
which we can neutralize the overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system and can cure all the troubles of the sympathetic. For
example, cancer is nothing but the overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system. Through Sahaja Yoga, we have definitively
cured, absolutely cured cancer patients. Of course, I mean, that's not my intention. That’s not. To cure people is not my intention
at all. It is just a byproduct of Sahaja Yoga, just a byproduct. Because as soon as you become the controller of that ‘auto’, you
become part auto [unsure]. Now here's the doctor, she will understand what I'm saying, that there are seven plexuses which are
controlled by the parasympathetic and the sympathetic. By sympathetic, we are using all the power that is within us, like the
petrol we are exhausting. Now, by some means, if we can open the scalp here, and put ourselves all the time filling with that
petrol, we can never be exhausted. And all the problems that arise from that exhaustion will not arise. It is such a simple thing, is
the simplest thing which should happen to us.
After all, we are created for some purpose. Not for running away from ourselves. We are not created to hate ourselves. We are
created to know ourselves. Our Self, the Self which is nothing but complete integration of beauty, love and knowledge. And
knowledge that I care after you. What’s Self? It cannot be defined. All the knowledge of the world comes from that ocean of
knowledge [unsure]. All the beauty of the world manifests from that thing. All the love that you have had minced [unsure] are just
nothing but the pure showers of that ocean.
With the sympathetic nervous system, when we start exhausting ourselves, we develop an ego and a superego. Everyone. You

see, one shouldn't think that, some people say I'm egoless”. There is no question how you speak to other. Some people say,
“There are very beautiful people”. That's not the point. Nobody is ugly according to my judgment. But what I am saying, that they
are not aware of their beauty.
The ego and superego, both exist in all of us because of our sympathetic activity, means going out. With the sympathetic activity,
we go out, get ourselves involved outside and exhaust the little energy that is within ourselves.
Now Kundalini is another residual energy which is kept in reserve. It is there. It exists. You can even see it. If you can come
sometimes, I mean I don't know what sort of arrangements we are going to have here. But I can show you
the pulsation of a Kundalini in many people. I can also show the rising of the Kundalini within you, with your naked eyes, whether
you are Realized or not. That is not the question. But if you get Realization yourself, which is very easy also, because it is just like
the sprouting of a seed. If you get yourself Realized, then not only that you can see the Kundalini of others, but you can feel it and
control it and check
it and can enlighten the another person. Because as soon as you get Realization, through Self you know, you get the Collective
Consciousness. Now people have talked, Jung, for example, has talked about Collective Consciousness. But I don't know how
far he understood it, because he had no experience.
She can have a glimpse of a thing. For example, I can see Delhi from the aircraft, but I have not been in Delhi. So, the complete
experience was not there. But you do get a Collective Consciousness. It’s such an event. Why I'm saying it is absolutely
scientific? Because even a small child, say, about two years or three years of age, can feel the same way as an elderly person or
an old man of ninety. All these three types of people, if they get Realized, they get the same experiences about another person
and they’ll say the same thing about that person, means the Kundalini of others. This is what Sahaja Yoga gives.
Now to talk about the whole engineering is a headache which I have to do. And you too get a headache, I also will get a
headache. Because those who do not understand should all want to tell, “All this engineering, it looks too much”. And those who
understand, they do not want to know about it. But as I said yesterday, that if you want to put on the light, it's better just to tell
you that, “You put on the switch and get the light there”. You don't bother your head to know what is the engineering. Because
engineering is there, no doubt, there is the autonomous system which works. It is worked through the nature. But if I start
explaining to you all the things that takes place, you will never ask for Self-realization. Because you are human beings, you’ll
develop a headache. But it’s natural to have a headache with such boring things. A person who wants to know how a seed
sprouts, if you start telling him all botany, he’ll say, “This is a bit too much”. So, for an easy thing like that, we need not go into the
engineering of it.
It is a very, very simple thing, but for human beings to be simple is the most difficult thing. You are so complicated that you find it
impossible to accept it. Sometimes, I wonder how human beings reach to their ends just like this. They shouldn't do everything
like that, the way they do everything upside down. When I say, “You don't have to do anything, it's a spontaneous road, it will work
out, you just don't worry”, they don't like it, they [go shopping? Unclear]. But if I tell you, “You have to jump for 10 days shouting
screaming” or if I tell you, “You have to stand on your head hundred time”, that people will be liking it much more than anything
else. The reason is we have this ego which makes a fool out of us. You want to feel that you are doing something about it. How
can you do it without doing anything? That is what the human mind is. It is such a foolish thing, when you’ll realize, you’ll really
laugh at yourself. It's so childish. Like a person going in an airplane, he was a villager, he was told not to carry too much luggage.
So, he carried a little luggage but he put that luggage on his head. So, people said, “What are you doing?” He said, ”I am trying to
reduce the weight of the plane”.
And in the same way, we are trying to reduce the weight of that great Divine by our small little efforts. And he says, “All right, go
ahead for a while”.
Like in Gita, Krishna befooled everyone when he said, "All right, you go ahead". Krishna was a great diplomat, a very great
diplomat. It was beyond human mind to understand what a diplomat he is. A spontaneous diplomat he was! And he would deal
with you, diplomatically. In his first, very first outset, he said that, "You seek it within", to Arjuna, who was another human being
and the mediocre both, put together. So, Arjuna says, "Oh Lord, you tell me to seek that within, and then you tell me to go to war".

What Krishna meant was that, “You become a witness of the play of the Divine whether you are in the war or in the house or in
the jungle, then it's just the same”. But when Arjuna put such a question to him, it was like the son trying to drive a cart without
the horse, and the horse stand behind it. So, the father says, "All right, go ahead my child, go on beating the cart, you'll reach there
one day, definitely you are going to reach there".
So, Krishna has put such absurd conditions which no human mind has been able to see, it shocks to the most. First of his
condition was that, whatever work you are going to do, what karmas you are going to do, put the fruit of that on the Lord: it’s an
absurd thing! You just can't do it! Whatever work you are going to do, there you feel you are going to do it. You don't feel that it is
happening or working you think that you are doing it. You put the fruit of that at the feet of the Lord is an absurd condition. It
cannot be. It is just like, as I told you, the horse is behind the cart. So, he said, "Let them go ahead with this".
And I was surprised to see people have written books after books, bachelor after bachelor, they give lectures after lectures on
this quote that, "You must put the fruit of your karmas at the feet of the Lord". And some of them believe also, that they are doing
this work. None of them are doing it, I must tell you. In England, as you might say, it might be that you are just teaching your style.
But the difference is, I am a mother. So, I have to, I have to tell you the truth. Then see, there's another absurd statement he has
made, how he has tried to befool you. It's very interesting, know, the way Krishna has befooled you all the ages and we have been
befooled.
Everyone had their own style Christ had his own and Krishna had his own. So, for 'bhakti' he says, for worshiping God, Krishna
says, "You do bhakti. You must do bhakti. But do 'ananya' bhakti". Now this 'ananya' is a very wonderful word. When you worship
Him 'ananya'. And 'ananya' means: 'when there is not the other'. When you have become one, ‘ananya’. When you are one, why
should you do bhakti? When the drop becomes the sea, what bhakti he is going to do? To whom to worship? You yourself
become that, where are you going to do the bhakti kavach?
Nobody has felt the absurdity of this kind of a bhakti. He says that, "First of all, the word 'ananya' is to be used. That is, 'ananya'
means, you should become one. That is when you become completely Self-realised. it means that. Once you are completely
Self-realised, then what bhakti are you going to do? [Laughter] Understand? You see, the whole thing is nothing but a complete
diplomacy of Shri Krishna who was a spontaneously diplomat. His diplomacy, if our diplomats learn, all our problems will be
solved. To make fool of everyone and make them understand that this is all absurd, so they come back to the reality.
It is like saying that you have to be on your inner thread or on the ‘sutra’ [thread of yoga], as they call it. But you can go above it,
but you have to be on the ‘sutra’. So, how can that? It is an absurd thing. It would be something like that: I sit here and go about in
Delhi. But if I can sit here in such a way that this becomes an airplane, then I can go about in Delhi and I'm on this also. So, first of
all, I must get the connection with it. All our bhakti calls is nothing but we are dialling a telephone which has no connection. They
sing, "Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama". You go to the Church, "Oh, Christ help us pray to God". Whom are you praying? Tomorrow
Christ comes and stands before you, you are not going to recognize him. I know that for definite.
For a person like Tulsidasa, in America now, we have at least 10 or 11 Tulsi born again. [Laughter] The most surprising thing is
that everywhere now, the ‘bhagavans’ are being born. And we have no way to know who is a ‘bhagavan’ and who is a rakshasa.
Because there is no connection with the mains. Tulsidas was such a great poet. He wrote all about Shri Rama. And when Shri
Rama came before him, he gave him a ‘tilak’ [mark?], you all know that, he didn't recognize him. At least, he was lucky, he had
Karmana [unsure] to help him there. Here we do not have anyone and we do not know who is a rakshasa, who is a ‘bhagavan’ or
who is what. This is the state of affairs in which all the bhaktas are being with.
With this king of things, when I talk a spontaneous growth of your awareness, it is hard to because so many shops have already
been opened, to sell awareness in the market. And already most of them have been able to spoil your inner being, by their
methods which always employ efforts.
For example, somebody gives you a mantra. What is a mantra? Anybody can give you: why don't you think you are all human
beings, intelligent people, [unclear]. Even a dog can give you a mantra! Why should you go to these 'swamis' to get a mantra? I
just can't understand. And pay them money for a mantra. How can you pay for God's words? Can you purchase God?

They are testing our intelligence by this. We are tested. Let us know that Divine has no interest whatsoever in your material gain.
For example, people are even telling about the horse, what horse is going to do. There are 'sadhus' like that. They will tell you
what horse is going to win. There are 'sadhus' who materialize things also. We must know that these worldly things are dust at
the feet of that Lord. Even not the dust, I should say, that should be too much at his feet. What is the interest of the Divine in
giving you something that is dust? Will your Mother give you a stone? Because you are materialistic, that's why. This is a testing
of your materialistic temperament. All falsehood has become a reality to us and reality has become extinguished, I mean we
cannot see the reality. We are born nothing but human beings. That you know very well. I mean we all know these facts like this.
But we are never human beings: we are either Americans, we are English or Indians. We belong to this culture: that place or to
this place or to that place. We are but known by this name or that thing. We are officers or we are ministers, or we are some
executives or something like that, but we are never ourselves. All this is such a falsehood that has been coming on us, and all the
time we are trying to preserve that falsehood and cling on it. Our materialism is tested by Divine and so those people who get
entangled with such horrible experiments of these, I should say, very dangerous people, are really the people who are seeking
materialism. Or maybe that these people are clever enough to find out what are your weaknesses.
In my search, in the beginning, to work out Sahaja Yoga on people, I've met many of these folks. And some people said, "I was
shocked the way they are planning out". [Unsure]
In one place, he said, "This is a spontaneous thing we are going to work out". And big, big things, he was talking about. He is a
very well-read man. He talks very well. He can give a very big lecture, he can make you dance, he can do whatever it is. This is all
nothing but the play of the sympathetic nervous system.
But the way he had planned money, he was just like a businessman. He studied what are the weaknesses of a Yogini [unsure],
one, two, three, four, five.. Then he took all the rich men and all the powerful men of Bombay and of Delhi, and of Calcutta, of
Madras and of America and all these places. Searching them out. And he found out how to exploit them. Then he found out how
to place them in different categories, and what is the way to approach them and entice them and quiz them completely and then
to leave them behind, without a scratch [unsure] or anything [unsure]. Wonderful cheats are born as God’s keepers [unsure]. This
is the Kali Yuga.
But in this, Sahaja Yoga is the only way to know who is a cheat and who is a Realised personality. You know that the whole world
is made out of vibrations. And there are vibrations which are working the whole creation of the universe and the whole creation
of a human being, and the creation of his mind. And the complete plan is to make this beautiful thing as human being and then to
put this human being in connection with the mains, to record, to see and visualize the play of the Divine. The Divine is a power
which is abstract, which has no form, but it can think, it can plan, it can know, it can feel, it can create. It's most beautiful. It
understands. Every detail of the working of the living thing is done through the understanding of that divine Power. It is guiding
us. It is looking after us.
To know That, there is only one and a natural way, is Sahaja Yoga. And whatever is unnatural is not the way, but is an intellect.
So, anybody who says that you can do this thing, or read something to meet God or to do that to meet God, is wrong. He is not
true. It is such a powerful magnet, that the little magnet of yours cannot do anything whatsoever to attract that Power. What you
can do is just to drop this little, that ego, and become one with it. And have the whole of it flowing through you and work it out.
Whatever I am telling you is not a new thing. it has been said by all the great Prophets, by all the great men who were - I do not
mean politicians or people who were great warriors or anything - but those who were Realized people. All of them have said the
same thing, but in a different way. This is the age of science, that's why I'm telling you scientifically the significance of your
awareness and the significance of Kundalini. It's an Indian name and they say it's not in science. But there are so many words
still to be framed for science. But science, as it is, whatever is today, is not the complete science. This is a fact, at least, we must
accept. Because what do we know of science? We can talk about something, gravity for example, we can say there is gravity.
Gravity exists, but how does it come there?

It's just a matter of fact, we get gravity and then we try to explain, that’s all. But how is it there? How the light exists? Nothing is
explained this science.
This is an experience of the unknown through Sahaja Yoga. Spontaneously, you become one with that All-pervading Power. But
how are you to know that, that you have become? For example, you all are paying attention to Me. but if I ask you, “Please, pay
attention to your Self” you cannot. See, what a simple thing I am asking you for. You just can’t do that. You cannot pay attention
to your Self. And once you become one with your Self, you become one with everybody’s Selves, which can be felt with this
experience, that you can feel the Kundalini of others.
As they say, ‘sutra’ [thread]. ‘Sutra’ is like the threat passing through all of us, like a necklace. There is a threat passing through
various pearls. We are all pearls and there is a thread passing. Our attention is on the pearl, so we are all separated.
But somehow, if we can take our attention on the Self, we can pass on to anybody's Self. We just automatically can do it. Just we
have to just to think of it, just to pay attention. The attention that is inside us, is both in the inside of others. For example, as I can
see my hand, I can see your hand also, because attention is outside, I can see the outside of it. But if my attention can go inside
of me, I can go inside of you also. I do not mean what you are thinking, and what you are doing and who is going to meet you.
that's not the interest to me.
I mean to say, when I say the attention passes in, that what is the problem with you, that you cannot get enlightenment. The
interest becomes very different. For example, you go to some ‘sadhuji’, he will immediately tell you, “Just now, you are thinking of
your dead mother”. What is so great about it? When you find me thinking of my dead mother, or of my living mother, what
difference does it make to the Divine? Is that the thing that Divine is existing there, just to tell us what my mother has been
thinking about me?
Is it that important? The most important thing, the only important thing, the complete importance of human beings, the existence
of it, is nothing but Self-realization.
He has come in this world to realize [his Self]. And once he has it, whatever technique he has developed- for example, there is an
artist who becomes that. Then the art starts flowing through his being, automatically, spontaneously, he doesn't know from
where the ideas are coming. If he is a writer, same thing. If he is a politician, same thing. if he is a mother, same thing. Because
the awareness, whatever little awareness you have got within you, you are showing these results, because the complete starts
working in you in complete harmony with the Divine. And you cannot imagine how dynamic it is.
Even going to the jungles and taking ‘sannyasa’ is against, absolutely against, Sahaja Yoga. You have to be a normal person. All
these abnormalities are against Sahaja Yoga.
Any abnormality you indulge into, even a widow [unsure]. Who is a widow in this world? I can't find anybody a widow. Actually, it
hurts me to see that somebody feels that she is a widow. All absurd ideas of insulting the human Self, is not congenial to the
working of Sahaja Yoga. It is love, it is a divine love that has worked out all this creation and is going to work out this
spontaneous growth within yourself. Only divine love, nothing else. The divine love that is knowledge that is truth. That is the
truth.
This love is to be experienced. If you allow this love to work its own way, and do not interfere with that, it is going to work out.
And you just think how human beings have grown outside: we have been to Moon. We could not believe it. About 30 years back,
or say, about 40 years back, it was an impossibility. You could never imagine that human beings will reach the Moon, but they
have. Of course, if I tell my grandmother, she'll never believe. She'll say it's falsehood. There are many young grandmothers we
have among ourselves. When I tell them that there is Self-realization that is possible, they just don't believe it. They do not want
to.
But Self-realization has to be there. When we have grown so much outside, when ta tree grows too much outside, it must seek its
source. Otherwise, it is going to fall off. And that is what we are in, at the brink of our destruction. If we do not accept this jump

into the unknown, we are going to be destroyed, physically by the horrible diseases like cancer, mentally by madness and
emotionally by loneliness. Because we are seeking Collective Consciousness, which, if we do not achieve it, this loneliness is
going to kill us. No matter how much you progress materially, human beings cannot be happy unless and until they get what they
have been wanting: it’s the eternal joy. We have been seeking nothing but that joy in all our searches, money, position, and even
religion.
But we must decide that, “I am asking that supreme, “Param” and nothing else”. Just to decide that, and it works out in you. I'm
not asking anything else but that.
[REALISATION STARTS]
We will have to go into meditation because all my talking is also talking and conditioning. Whatever one may say about religion,
is conditioning, is not the religion. Religion is to be experienced. So, we all have to go into meditation. When I say, “Go into
meditation”, again you mean ‘effort’, I do not mean that.
It is a very simple thing that you have to do, is to put all your hands towards Me, just like this. You have to close your eyes. And
you have to watch your thoughts that are coming to you from inside. Before we start this, I want to tell you, especially Indians,
that those who are wearing any necklaces or the sanadhura [unsure] and all those things that you get from those
‘sadhus’,‘sannyasis’, please put them outside or give it to somebody here. If you are tied on something, please give it. We had a
terrible time this morning with somebody like that.
46:54
Anybody who is wearing like that, please give it outside; so we'll manage that.
[Hindi conversation]
This morning we had a terrible time.
[Hindi conversation]
And sit completely relaxed, as if you are going to have your dinner. You are going to do nothing. Be just like children.
[Hindi conversation]
49:30 Yesterday, it was a very great experience because we were very few people, about 30 people and about 18 people got their
Realization. It's a very great day for us. I mean, it doesn't matter how many people there are. The most important thing is how
many get it. It just happens to you and we cannot say that it will happen. It just happens.
You have to put your hands towards Me [Hindi].
And you just listen to Me before closing your eyes. This is just like putting up an antenna that's all, to receive that.
And if you, any one of you, feel in your fingers, anything burning - you will, some of you will- or shaking hands. Or if you feel the
heaviness in the hand or some people feel little something moving in the body, anyone like that should keep the eyes open and
just watch Me and keep the hands. And when this disappears, then they should close the eyes.
After closing the eyes, some of you might feel that there is a flickering of the eyelids, you just can't close. Some of you will feel
that. If you feel that dark, then also please, open the eyes and do like this, once or twice like that, and close your eyes again.
Even again you feel it, then keep your eyes open. That means there is a- someone who is resisting, who is the resistance inside.
But you don't worry. I have all faith in the Divine love which is greater than all the haters of the world. And anybody who is hating
you, cannot stand in the way of Sahaja Yogis. Now if you - some people will start shaking also. Some people, especially if who
are mentally deranged, they shake too before Me. So, such people should open their eyes and watch Me. Because that means,
either somebody has done something to them, or maybe that from childhood, they are suffering from some such mental trouble.
It is all the question of libido which I'll explain later on.

After closing the eyes, you just watch your mind. Best way, you could tell your mind that, “Now please, for Heaven's sake, let me
know what you are thinking”. That's all. With all love, just ask, “Now what are you thinking?” You ask yourself and you watch the
thoughts that are coming. But don't take any name yourself, or any deliberations about it. Whatever thoughts, whether a good,
bad, or whatever it is coming, you just watch. Between the thoughts, there is a little gap which is to be yours/used.
Then the most important thing is that you have to be completely alert inside and outside. You will be able to hear Me. You will be
able to hear whatever is going on. And suddenly, you will find that inner silence will be established. That is thoughtless
awareness that will come within you. And after some time, you might get some sort of a vibration coming inside you, means,
very cool breeze like thing, just like as you would feel before a cooler. Those who were Realized yesterday, have started feeling it.
But do not tell yourself that, “I must have it. I must get it”. Nothing of the kind. If this works out, it will work out. So, you are all the
people who do not know how to swim. And those who are already Realized are the people who know how to swim. So, you know,
those who do not know how to swim, are told not to move. But the people who know how to swim, will do whatever they can to
save. And once you are out, you will also be able to do the same. It's like one light to enlighten the other.
As I've told you, you have to be very, very alert and aware. And one thing may happen that sleep may crawl upon you. Sleep may
crawl. Because that's the best way the mind can put off. And with very few people, who are used to hypnotism, you will become
going to trance, which is all wrong and falsehood. Trance is nothing but the overpowering of the subconscious on the conscious
mind. So, please, do not get into trance. If you think you are getting into trance, you keep your eyes wide open. If you are getting
terrible sleep, also, you get your eyes wide open. That is also a kind of a method which is used by these people, to entice you or
to take you away from the reality.
So, keep completely awake. Close your eyes if you can properly close your eyes and watch yourself inside, means, watch your
thoughts as they are coming to you. This is a very simple thing. And if possible, you can just put little attention here. Not the
concentration part of it, but just attention as you pay attention to your home or something sitting down here. Just whatever is
happening, you just see it.
That would help. And do nothing at all. Breathing has to be absolutely normal.
Sit quiet, completely.
[Hindi].
Pay attention to yourself and not to others. At the slightest pretext, don’t open your eyes.
[End of audio]

1973-1124, Question And Answers
View online.
24 November 1973
Question And Answers
Public Program
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS DELHI 1973-1124
Sahaja Yogi: This program is recorded at Delhi on 24 November 1973. Here Shri Mataji is replying to the questions of the
“sadhakas” (seekers) during the ten-day series of lectures held at Delhi.
Shri Mataji: …to your subject matter. I will just try to continue with my thoughts. And later on, if you have any problems, I’ll answer
about them. But as I told you, it is an ocean, ocean of knowledge,and I have been speaking like this for five years. And some of
them have been hearing Me for about five years.
But still, everything I say, they want to record it and want to re-hear it and I don't know, soI think it is all a bottomless pit.
Now, what exactly Kundalini is? Let us start from this point, I will go one by one to different subjects. Just before Kundalini, let us
know what is creation. Because without creation you do not understand the place of Kundalini. Which I will, in a very short form,
tell.
The entire creation, like the tree, is the manifestation of one seed, which we can call as “Brahmabeej” ( seed of Brahma). Is the
seed of creation. Now every seed has a germinating power. In the same way, the Brahmabeej also has a germinating power.
Now it’s a hypothesis for you. For all the scientific understanding, it is a hypothesis. But we can establish it later on by our
experiments. So, it becomes a law and a scientific fact.
In the beginning, this seed, there is no beginning and end, but let us start from a stage, from where the seed becomes the tree
and the tree becomes the seed. The seed vibrated first time, and the vibrations of Divine Love, which is the power of that seed of
Brahma.
Divine Love is awareness itself and is a power which has got electricity, magnetism and all material powers in It. Also, a power
that thinks, regulates, plans and creates. You can’t conceive of such a power. Because such a power does not exist in the
material world.
So, from the seed, the vibrations of awareness started. (I think you should put your hands like this so that your de-conditioning
also goes on with my speech.) So, the vibrations of that Divine Love spread on all the sides of the seed and formed the surface.
This is what we call as Shakti, is the power, the Divine Love. Or the Divine Power.
So, the seed was separated. The seed of Brahma, which was abstract, in the sense that it was not manifesting in any material
appearances, manifestations, the seed was separated from the Shakti, and we had two forces working, one was the Brahma
itself as a seed and another as its power, as the Shakti.
They call it, the Shaivites call it as the Shiva and the Shakti. Vaishnavites call it as a Vishnu, Krishna and Radha. Whatever you
call it, is not the point. Actually, we human beings only call them by names and separate them.

But, actually, there were only two things that existed. The first, the Ishwara, the witness, the regulator, the supervisor, who was
watching his own Shakti and the play of that Shakti.
The Shakti started manifesting itself. But, the Ishwara is the supervisor; He is the witness and He is silent.
Shakti had three powers. How She manifested, how She came into being, is another subject. How She has managed it is another
subject. But She has got three powers. First power is, through Her ego, which is an incarnating power. Second power is Her
Divine power, and the third power is Her material power.
Divine power throughout regulated, created the whole Universe. Shakti, by another movement, created three types of moods.
Three moods She created by movement like that. Thrice She moved like that, around Her ego and these three moods were, like a
mother, She had a desire to have a child. Desire! So, She created “Tamo guna”. Then She had to act on that, so, She created the
“Rajo guna”, the activating force. And once she has created Her own creation, She wanted to reveal her love. So, the “Sattva
guna” was created, the Revelation.
She is the Mother. If you can think of, She is the mother of all the mother. How a mother sees her child, She sees Her creation.
First, She creates through the Divine power, acting on the material power, all the creation. And then, She comes again and again,
again and again, in three different forms. She comes as a mother Herself. Then She is most powerful and expressive. As she has
come you know as Nava-Durga She has come, as Mother Mary She has come, as Quan Yin She has come. She has come in many
forms in many parts of the world. She came as Muhammad’s daughter, She came as Nanaka’s sister, She came as Janaka’s
daughter.
Only one person all the time, coming in this world in different forms. When She comes only as a Mother, She is very different, and
She is very dynamic. But, sometimes She comes as a wife and sometimes as a mother, then She is dormant. She acts, but She is
not felt. Like, Radha of Krishna. Same Mother comes, again and again, incarnates to help the people to evolve out of this
Bhavasagara, the void. She creates the Maya, She creates the illusion. Like a mother, like a mother bird who hides herself and
calls her little one. The little birdie. So, the little bird can spread its wings to find the mother.
She creates all the illusion. And it is She only, who make you realise that it is all an illusion. She makes you feel that you are
separate from Her. The “I” ness in you She develops Herself. And then She wants you to find out the means, the Mother, the
all-pervading Chaitanya that is your Mother. And by this, doing this She matures you throughout and creates a beautiful
instrument out of a human being. And then She reveals Her love and exposes Herself, Her love into your being.
First, the material evolution took place as you know very well. I have spoken on that also. I would not like to touch that now.
Then, up to the human level it has stopped. Now the human being has raised his body. The animal has not. But human being
raised his body and his brain starts developing in a conical way. That conical structure gives it a prism-like quality, by which, the
Chaitanya, the light, when it pours into the brain, goes into refraction. I hope you understand the word refraction. Means it passes
through the prism, as you have seen, “kendrikaran” (centralisation) they call it. The rays are separated. Only in the human beings,
the rays of Chaitanya are separated, and not in the animals. And the rays that pass through the center of the fontanelle bone
here, which you call as “talu”, it is a very important thing.
It passes through the apex of the brain and goes straight directly down to the medulla oblongata and settles down at the back of
the triangular bone known as the coccyx [sacrum bone]. It is completely parasympathetic in its function, that is, it fills you up
completely and that rests there as the residual consciousness. That is the Kundalini. Doctors may not agree today but they will
have to agree one day. I can show you the breathing of the Kundalini in the coccyx [sacrom bone]. [Mother is talking aside to
Sahaja Yogis].
So, in the centre of this, in the centre of your head, at the coccyx, from there to the coccyx, is a line which goes down through the

medulla oblongata and is known as the channel of“Sushumna”. The two other things that pass across like that, are sympathetic
in nature because they are there to exhaust your energy, also, are known as sympathetic nervous system. But their channels are
known as “Ida” and “Pingala”.
So, the Mother Kundalini settles down (as) the residual consciousness in the coccyx. She is very well settled there, waiting for an
opportunity to rise. And the opportunity is, when her child, she has only one child. And throughout his birth, she is following him.
She is all the time there. When the child dies, her vacuum is created. And (when the child is born again), again she comes back in
the same child. And she knows all the problems of the child.
This Kundalini gives you the rebirth. You have heard about “dwijaha” the one who is twice-born. Every religion,every religion, I
mean religion; I do not mean irreligion – every religion has preached that you have to be reborn. Those, who have not, are no
religion.
Religion in the Sanskrit language is “dharma”. Dharma means “dharaiticha dharma”, the one which you sustain. Whatever you
sustain is the dharma. Still, sustain does’nt have that meaning, but still, you can say sustain. Because in the law ministry and all
that, you hear this word, it is too much and so cheaply. But one that sustains is the dharma. Sustains what? Sustains the meeting
of the all-pervading. Not the “jadugar ka kaam” (magician’s work), see the way that they go on “jadu, yahaan se nikaal diya,
wahan se nikaal diya” (making things appear out of nowhere), all this thing are not dharma. Remember one thing that all these
things are not dharma. Dharma is only the one that sustains the meeting of Atma (Spirit) with Paramatma (God Almighty).
In the human being, in his heart, in every human being, in the heart of all the living beings, is the reflection of the Atma, which is of
the Paramatma, which is the Ishwara, which I have told you about, He is reflected. And like a flicker of a flame, just like your
thumb, it is there in your heart. Actually you, all your growth, creation, everything, is managed by your heart – not by your brain. In
the seat of the heart, in the centre of the heart.
[Inaudible/someone asks a question].
No, no, I will tell you what. Your point is all right. The doctor says the heart is here. The heart is the organ. The heart is the organ,
which is looked after by the cardiac plexus. So, part of the cardiac plexus is looking after the heart. Because cardiac plexus has
got many sub-plexuses. Out of which, except for four of them, the rest of them, that is, the heart has got twelve sub-plexuses. Out
of which eight of them are looking after the heart. Four of them, other things, I mean, there is a mixture of all these things, some
of them are looking after the heart and some of them are looking after the mind.
But this light is in your heart, in the organ heart – not in the plexus. Plexus is for the play of the Kundalini. But the Kundalini
moves in such a way that she goes to the heart later on and the enlightenment takes place. The spark starts from there.
And when we raise your Kundalini through Sahaja Yoga, the system is followed like this, the Kundalini rises because of a certain
condition being filled. There is a gap in your Sushumna, which is shown outside also, that below the heart, the vagus nerve ends
abruptly. And up to the aortic plexus, there is a Void. If there is a doctor, he will understand it. This Void is to be filled by the same
Divine love. If somebody, who has got the Divine love flowing through her or his being, then such a person can pour that love, that
water of love for your seeking journey. This is the condition of Sahaja Yoga. That is why a person who is not Realised cannot do
this. Even a Realised person may not be able to do this. Because he must be at a certain stage of that Divine love by which he
can give Realisation.
For example, we have given Realisation to thousands of people both here and abroad and also awakening to, I do not know how
many thousands. But out of them, only eleven people so far can give Realisation. And they know the technique of giving the
realisation and telling the people how to maintain it. Only eleven in these five years. The day I have a thousand like you, no
problem.
I need a thousand hands to fight the war between the dharma and adharma. Dharma can be established. But the only problem of

Sahaja Yoga is that you have to be completely independent and free. And that you must choose it by your will. Your will will be
respected till the end. If you have no will to have it, you cannot have it. It is not enticement or mesmerism by which I can do it. So
naturally, it will have to work slowly, gradually, according to your will. If you do not have the will, I am going to respect you as a
mother respects her grown-up son. It is for you to decide to have it. It is in your will, you get the experience and you are sure of it.
And once you get it, there is no doubt left in your mind. You know that.
I beg your pardon?[Inaudible/question about method].
Shri Mataji: Now, in this? There are different and different types of people and different types of things they have done to their
own Kundalini. The problem is how far you have kept your Kundalini alright. It is very important. Because it falls in many places.
We have seen, we are trying to pull it up and it’s going down.
But nothing will happen to you. You will not know a thing. Now, the method to be followed, I tell you that later on, with that course
I will tell you.
Now, the method to be followed is not your job. Is not your job. It is to be done by the Divine Love itself. Why should you worry?
You never asked to be created. You never asked for all this headache. Why should you worry about these things? Let the Divine
look after you.
But, in our ignorance, as human beings are, most of them are very ignorant people. They may be very learned. We feel we are
carrying the load of the world on our heads. The other day, as I told you a joke, that some villagers who were going by plane. They
were told not to carry such a lot of luggage. When they took their seats, they put all the luggage on their heads. And when they
were asked, “Why are you putting the luggage on your head?”, they said, “Oh, we are trying to reduce the weight of the aeroplane”.
The One who has created you, the One who is doing everything, the One who is pulsating your heart, every moment every minute
he is looking after your breathing. What can you do? What method do you have to produce one plant out of one seed? One. I say,
one. Human beings have no method to do anything that is living.
But, in our ignorance, we think that we are doing something. We are doing nothing whatsoever. We have to be the tool of the
Divine. That is why we are born on Earth. And Sahaja Yoga itself means Sahaja, means, born with you.
Now, you know what do you do to digest your food? Nothing. What do we do to make our heartbeat? Nothing. In the same way,
you do nothing to get realisation. Actually, this is a fact.
And what do I do? I just love you. That’s all. If I say I love you, you might think it is a relative term, it is not. It is like the sunshine.
As the sun shines on you, My love shines on you. And the love pour into your being, deconditions you, and that void is filled, and
the Kundalini rises in her glory.
But so far, all the other Kundalini jagruti (awakening) you might have heard about, you just forget them.
[Inaudible/someone asks or comments].
Oh, just forget. They are so confused, to such an extent. You may have read very, very big books, I know. So many people have
written, and I used to laugh at them.
Now, some, they are so much confused that they do not know that Mooladhara is separated very much from Mooladhara chakra.
It is a very important point you have brought out. I wish I could tell you because you are all matured people.
Mooladhara is the coccyx where the Kundalini mother is sitting there; your holy mother is sitting. Mother is a holy thing. You are
already sublimated. You are not to be sublimated. Those who talk of sex sublimation are foolish people, they have no idea. You

are already having your mother seated there, just waiting for this little happening.
Mooladhara chakra is the only chakra in which is outside the medulla oblongata and is seated at a point from where it also
controls your sex. Sex is something like we have got an outlet in our household, “mori” (Marathi meaning sink). A little of that
energy flows there and it is settled at Mooladhara chakra. Finished. Do we, when we want to drink water, do we pump out that
mori and put up that water there – even if we do not have water to drink? How can you have evolution this way by going through
sex?
Sex has nothing to do with Kundalini, I can assure you that. On the contrary, those who try these tricks, putting the sex on their
mother, are insulting their mother to such an extent that she gets angry and annoyed. And her temper which crawls on your
sympathetic nervous system gives you all these horrible experiences of shouting, screaming, jumping and all doing all kinds of
things.
She is your mother. As an Indian, you can understandwhat is a mother Now that Freud was another of rakshasa who preached all
these nonsensical things about human beings. He only knew about libido, he had not the complete knowledge about human
beings. He just discussed libido. And with libido, he confused Kundalini, and he is talking about all these suppressed feelings
which are nothing but expression and manifestation of the libido. Libido is just a part on the side which we call as Pingala Nadi.
He has ruined the American mind by talking about this. And the American mothers, poor things are completely crushed under it.
At least, thank God in India, we do not have this problem. We have many others but not this.
Americans have solved lots of their problems and are now on the brink of realisation. But the only problem is this Mr Freud who
has put wrong ideas into their heads about their mothers. If that was not there, it is a wonderful place and beautiful people just
seeking realisation. About to get realisation.
So, we as Indians understand what our mother is and putting the sex on her. Except for Jung, who was right disciple, who has
refuted allhis charges many a times and written books after books against this kind of attitude, one-sided attitude of Freud. But
few people have read Jung. That’s the tragedy.
But as it is, now this is the wrong type of Kundalini sadhana as they call it. She never gets angry. You do not know how much she
loves. She loves you more than I do. When I try to raise your Kundalini, she says first cure my child. This is the problem of my
child of previous birth. This is the problem of my child of this birth. Physically this is the problem. Will you please first cure the
child? So, I have to jolly well cure you, otherwise, she will not come up.
[Inaudible/question about the position of Kundalini].
Now, her position in the medulla oblongata is the coccyx in the triangular bone, where she sits in three and a half coils. Which
you can see also, later on. When you are realised and go to a certain state. And when you have got it, through your
parasympathetic and you can go your sympathetic and see all these things.
They are so confused, if you read their books, don’t you find they are very much confused? About their positions and everything
that they talk about. Some say the Mooladhara chakra is here and some say it is there. How can that be? Truth is only one.
[Inaudible/Tantriks?]
Tantriks are another type, I do not know what to call them. They are harming themselves and all the rest of the world. And they
will take ages to get realisation. Ages. It’s a sin they are committing. All the tantrikas.
What is a shakti without love? There is no shakti without love. Tantriks do not know where they are, what they are doing. They are
just doing it. Now, as far as Kundalini is concerned, I have covered that topic. Now, about tantrikas, as he has come, let me talk

about libido because that he is interested. But what about meditation then? Should we talk about tantrikas tomorrow? All:
Tomorrow.
Shri Mataji: On Libido because we must have the experience, that is the main thing. Because meditation is the most important.
Realised, those who are realised understand the importance of Realisation. Because talks are talks, reading is reading and Divine
is Divine. You cannot reach there with your thoughts or reading. On the contrary, those who have read too much, it is very difficult
for me to make them understand this is all “avidya” (false knowledge
How do you describe your Mother in words? Have you got enough words to even describe the material mother you have? Then
how can you understand that Divine, which is the mother of all the mothers. It is for you to feel that love and jump into the ocean
of that love which is knowledge, complete knowledge. And beauty.

1973-1125, Seven Chakras and their Deities, Paane ke baad
View online.
25 November 1973
Seven Chakras And Their Deities, Paane Ke Baad
Public Program
New Delhi (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Reviewed
Public program, talk after Self-realization, “Seven Chakras and their Deities” (Paane ke baad), translated from Hindi, November
25th,1973, Delhi, India
That you have to do nothing at all. It happens in “Sahaj” (Hindi word ) .In day-to-day language, the meaning of word Sahaj ()
is ‘easy’. The origin of this word is from ‘Saha’ () and ‘Ja’ (). These two words make the word ‘Sahaj’, meaning ‘easy’. Means
that is ‘born with you.’ , like the eyes born with us, the nose born with us, we don’t have to look after their functioning. Because of
this no complete reflection falls on this. If there is a lake which has no ripples the beauty surrounding the lake completely
reflects on it. Not only this, but also becomes one with it. . Similarly, when you look at some beautiful sight, look at Divine
creation, you will become thoughtless. On becoming thoughtless the power of joy that lies in that (Divine creation), it gets fully
reflected in you.You get fully identified with it (become one with it).
In the same way, [Unclear] God Almighty has adorned the creation in many ways for you. Extreme beauty is spread spread all
over. Just by getting into the source of that beauty that joy is created in you. You were born only to see that joy and not to make
yourself miserable unnecessarily.
[Unclear] Many people have also asked what we have to do going forward? Now what is to be done? Just have to witness. When
you go to see a movie as an audience then you do not think what do we have to do.
Everything has to be witnessed. Have to keep witnessing.. Have to witness the coming and going (refering to coming and going
of life on earth), have to witness the growing of trees, have to witness the chirping of the sparrows. Everything’s auspicious
sacred sweet smile, voice of God’s blessings filled with joy (referring to grains swaying in the field) in everything, has to be
listened to, nothing else is to be done. Just by witnessing this you will become Only by seeing it you will be absorbed in yourself .
Now there is joy in witnessing. There is no question of doing anything.. Now you will not have to do much for the health of your
body.As you would be doing many yoga asanas etc. then there is no need to do many yoga asanas etc.There is no harm if you do
a light yoga asana, but take much care of your body. God resides in this body, it is to be respected, there is no need to do any
injustice to it.
If you want to get rid of alcohol etc, it’s very easy. Now whatever you decide to do, it will be done.. You will not get conditioned. If
you have decided to get rid of alcohol you will be relieved of it. Human beings consume liquor because they do not want to face
themselves. I am not asking to give up anything else but liquor because it damages your consciousness. When you look at
alcohol, you stop drinking alcohol because you have started loving yourself so much.
There will be so much joy. If by chance someone of you is imprisoned, you will say. ‘Oh’! how nice! I will sit there and meditate.
One is in one’s own glory. There remains no urge for liquor or smoking cigarette. Nothing remains to be said, all the vices go
away by themselves.
In Bombay, condition is such that one match box has to be taken from home to burn incense and to light a candle.f No one
smokes. The chain smokers, I don’t know, how they have stopped smoking! Some people used to play rummy (game of cards),

they say, we have given up playing cards. Because they are enjoying. Life will become enjoyable.
There will be enjoyment in human beings, there will be fun in their problems, there will be fun in solving (struggling) them.Now
we should also keep this in mind that we do not have to struggle anymore.
You are not your old self; you are a changed personality. Now you have to see whether the other people are changing with us or
not. You have to witness them. There is nothing to be afraid of because you were also like them.
Some people think they are in very high position. They think no end of themselves. Some think themselves to be very rich and
others very religious. Let them think. They are all mad. Do not look to them. All the mad people in a lunatic asylum think
themselves to be very wise. When you were in that mad house, you used to think similarly. All these stupidities will go away
slowly. You will know the truth.
Now you are blessed with that power-such a power because of which you will not be affected by your thoughts. For example, if
one says to oneself. “I do not have to be angry, then ask yourself to be angry, stand before a mirror and ask yourself to be angry.
You will start laughing. In the state of anger keep laughing from within. All the time you keep laughing, you will not get caught up
with anger All vices such as lust, anger, ego, envy etc have their own way. You have to look at it. It is a play. You stay away
andwitness them from far. B you were outside earlier, now you are not the same, now you are inside.. That is what you have to do
in Sahaj, you have to be within not without.
While talking to others also stay within, that is,talk in thoughtlessness. Whenever you have to talk to someone, get thoughtless
first. You will penetrate in them as soon as you getinto thoughtlessness. Their outlook will be changed and you are already a
changed being. If you are not in thoughtlessness (within), then, maybe, that they pull you back. You could be move in and out
because you have just come within. For example, you are passing through traffic and are made to sit on the mountain. But you
have got used to the traffic, so mentally you think yourself to be still in the traffic. You have to see, “Where am I standing?” This is
Self Realization
The first thing is that you are in oneness with the beauty of the whole world.
Please know, this is something new. But very unique and unbelievable. No one believes it but it’s a fact. You yourself will realise
that you are a witness. At home if someone falls ilI then everyone starts running, fussing around.
Something true something false, nothing, absolutely no need to do anything. You witness yourself and it will dawn upon you as
to what action you have to take. Whatever you feel you should do. If you feel like putting your hand on the head, do it and if you
feel like touching the foot, touch it. Whatever is coming to your mind, is the truth, you do that.
Second aspect is the truth – that what should you tell, truth or lies? What is truth and what is untruth? Most of the truth is
manmade and man-made truth is not truth at all. Many-a-times something that appears untruth happens to be great truth. So,
you do not have to decide about it. You just tell, tell in your thoughtlessness, talk to people about your state. Boldly you have to
declare that this is alright, this the truth and it should be done. There is nothing to be afraid of.
May be, that people take it for untruth and they laugh at you. We went to Poona, there were some stupid people who published in
the newspapers that “Shri Mataji was moving her hands like this like this. She was mesmerising them.” One gentleman asked a
question that, “Why should She mesmerise people? Has She nothing else to do?” They told that, “We cannot be mesmerised”. He
said you can not be mesmerized. It is difficult to mesmerize (referring to Self Realization here) such people. Different type of
people are there in the world, who do not have descretion.
Because you have got chaitanaya in you, it is flowing in you, you have seen it, you do not need evidence for it. But you have not
attained magnificence and this is the difference between you and the great saints. You haven't got that brilliance yet which is
intense.

It stands firmly and is not afraid to say that, that is the only truth, everything else is untruth and a myth.’ This quality could be
found in great people like Christ, Shri Krishna and other great saints. It could be found in Adi Shankaracharya. You read his books
and you will get confirmation.
Now you read the scriptures afresh, read the Gita and Bible afresh and you will find that confirming truths are there in them. But
you yourself are powerful enough, you do not need support and help from anyone else. The moment you start standing by
your-self, in your glory, there is no need to feel shy about it or be afraid of anything.
But I have seen people who are single realized person in the family but he doesn’t tell anyone, keeps it to himself. It is said in the
Bible that the lamp is not to be kept under the table. It is to be placed on a higher place. If you have really become lamps (the
enlightened beings) then sit on a high pedestal and enlighten all others. You may belong to any religion. If you are a Sikh then see
in their scriptures, everywhere, it is written. It’s a truth which can be confirmed.
For your satisfaction the great saints have written it in all the scriptures. Shlokas after shlokas, could be said about it and lines of
Quran could also be quoted. They all confirm it. We may call it spiritual in English language, in Hindi it is called Adhyatmika and in
Urdu, Roohani [spiritual connection]. There are different names but ‘Truth is the One’.
If you all know that aspect, then you also know that there could be no description of truth. What could be the description of an
ocean? But every moment you will see,this is truth, this is untruth, ,this is the truth, this is untruth. With your vibrations you will
know of it. With the vibrations you will gauge it, you will know where vibrations are coming is the truth. Then you will see
vibrations everywhere-in stones, in earth, in every-thing.
If four-five chakras of a person are caught then there is no need to argue with him Such persons are very difficult, beyond you.
Immediately you will have hot vibrations in your hands. Run from there. A few days later, such a person will run away. He will
burn himself. From whomever you get hot vibrations, leave themHave no connections with the persons who have hot vibrations.
It is not for us t, it’s not mething spiritual. Here there is complete darkness.
The fight between the light and darkness is going on forever. Now, so many lamps have been lit, the whole atmosphere could
change if a few more lamps are lighted. So, always keep your lamp lit, always weigh your vibrations, vibrations always flow from
my photograph, they never stop. Stretch your hands towards my photograph.
Whenever you feel burning sensations on any of your fingers. Everything has got a meaning You know this is Manipura Chakra,
this is Vishuddhi, this is Agnya. This is Swadhisthana and this one is Mooladhara. And in the centre of your palm is the
Sahasrara. It is round.
If someone comes to you and tells that such and such person is unwell, please pray for him. You have nothing to do, you do like
this and wash it.That person will be benefitted. Sitting here, with the movement of your fingers everything is going to work out
Your attention has become Divine. You could check it yourself. Even on your feet there, all the chakras are made. Man is a great
creation of the Almighty. No instrument is as beautiful. The God Almighty has made this instrument extremely beautiful. What is
needed is its enlightenment. That part is also done, now what remains? What is remaining is that there is a lot.Now, you have to
work it out sincerely and see, what it is. Because a small lamp has been lit, you are sitting with it. There is no need to sit. When
you look within other people, then you will come to know what it is.
We have thought of an organisation. In Bombay, there is an institution with the name of “Anant Jeevan”. There is no membership
of it, all the realised people are its members. Many people get Realisation but then they go away. They come again and get it.
There might be half-baked people amongst you also.

Earlier we had requested Mr. Bose, you make him chairman or do as you like to. I will stay with him. His address . is 10, King
George Avenue. You could take his telephone number also.We will send photograph etc. to him. However, he is very busy person,
so reach on time. Friday is appropriate. Fix that day for your weekly meditation. With attention, I will see all of you.
You might have heard about the symbol of God like Shri Ganesha. His carriage is mouse.And you know about everyone’s
vehicles. Now your attention is your carriage. YOu ride on your attention.Your power resides in your attention, where ever your
attention goes it works out. It is so wonderful. Sitting here you can exercise your power and improve everything. Everyone, you
see, is torturing someone or the other. Bring them on Sahasrara and set them right. On Brahmarandhra, you will be amazed, their
condition has improved.
There are wicked people, Dushasanas, there are saints and above all of them, we, Sahaja Yogis, are here. In early morning we do
this business only that they get discretion. With the power of love people get changed because love is more powerful than
hatred. Like ocean, the power of love is fathomless. As there is no end to the expanse of the sea, there is no end of the ocean of
love, it rises more than hatred. If its power is lesser than the power of hatred then this world will be destroyed.
You have not still understood your responsibilities that it's time to create a new era, new people, new dimension. A new
dimension that you can understand with your vibrations. No one else can understand.The singer Siddheswari Bai who was just
singing here; yesterday her condition was very bad. With great reluctance she came to me and said, “I have to undergo such and
such operation, this that.” I just put my hand on her head and today she has started singing! You all could do this work, there is
nothing which I have not told you.
Now only a curtain remains within us. If you learn to tear out this curtain, then everything could be done. But to tear out this
curtain becomes difficult. However, you are realised now so the curtain between yourself has been removed. Now, the sooner
the difference between you and me is removed, the better it is.
The greatest thing in it is love. With have to become one with love. While talking to someone we have to decide first that we only
have to love. It is all love; you cannot make any mistake in this. As people tell me, you are giving Realisation to everyone.
Specially in America, there is concern that they could misuse it. I said, “How could they misuse it? They could only give
Realisation; they could cure someone with it”. With love you cannot harm anyone. Think yourself, if you love someone how could
you harm him? The identity of love is that it can never think of harming anyone.
Whatever is benevolent will take place. The only thing you have to do is to respect yourself. When you begin to respect
yourselves, you get established within because it is a temple: the more you respect il the more Divine Light is there in it. With love
you could get identified with It, only with love you could be one with it, in complete harmony. Only pure love could emanate from
you. The one which is Chaitanya is the truth and the beauty. You sit in thoughtless awareness and you will be one with it.
Thoughtlessness comes only when you cross this point (Agnya). You have crossed it and now you are in thoughtless awareness.
Your brain used to think. Now your Sahasrara is pierced and you are above your brain. When this point is reached, you could
check it with your hand. Those who are Realized, should check at this point
‘Ardha Bindu’ and they will feel it, but those who are not, will not feel. Are you feeling it? Slowly, feel it, take your hands slightly
up-down. That is the place of the ‘Ardha Bindu’. And above it, is ’Bindu’ and ‘Valaya’ is above all.
All that was made to create this world, has also been within human beings. First ‘Valaya’, then ‘Bindu’, after that ‘Ardha Bindu’,
and then this Sahasrara, then this whole kundalini was created. The Adi Kundalini itself penetrated in you and became your
Kundalini. Some people (Deities) were placed to establish the Adi Kundalini. In the beginning, it was necessary to establish
someone. Shri Ganesha was established first of all. Adi Shakti put Shri Ganesha only on one chakra. Only on one chakra.
What is Shri Ganesha? Only purity only purity. You think about this, if you have not bathed for a few days and there is dirt on our

body. You think that there are vibrations here and there are also vibrations here, and if we collect it after extracting it, then the
inert element which is there, there will be only vibrations inside it. That means they are just absolute bundles of purity.
Shri Ganesha is nothing but vibrations and purity because he is the Eternal Child. Eternal Child, and there can be no child like
him.Only purity and purity itself. His whole love is purity and purity only and because of that purity he has been placed on your
Mooladhara chakra. On Mooladhara is the Mother. Its clear meaning is that in sex matters, you have to be like little children. I
mean [Unclear] that when the dharma is established in you. you become childlike, innocent in sex matters.
It is difficult to attain the heights of Shri Ganesha because he is a very pure soul. His radiance is spreading all around. To
penetrate within, we have to be very pure otherwise no one else could be there except Shri Ganesha and His Mother.
In the process of creation, Brahmadeva was made the deity of the second chakra. But before Him, Shri Vishnu was created so
that there is a Sustainer for this Divine creation. That is the reason that we take birth from the Nabhi chakra of our Mother. And
then there is the creation of Father from the Nabhi, Brahmadeva was created. That’s how it was done, like pegs are placed There
is no untruth in it. You yourself could verify it.
Now this Void was created. It was all created, Vagus nerve and Aortic plexus around the void . And in it was the emanating love
for the creation. The whole creation got caught in this love. This love is the All-pervading Power, in it is the creation.
Now it is essential to cross this Void. But as I have told you earlier, the God and his Power is present in our heart as our soul. So,
as the child is born- not born, when it is in the womb of the mother, the witness state God Almighty comes in his Heart and looks
like a flame, the way this thumb is. This soul is in the left heart.
Many people get confused about it. They think soul is in the heart chakra, it is not in the heart chakra it is in the heart. Why does
He not reside in the Heart Chakra? Because it is the path of Kundalini to ascend. Heart Chakra is in the centre and the soul
resides in the left heart.
In the word ‘Rama’, ‘Ra‘means energy and ‘m’ means Mahesh, that is Shri Shiva. Mahesh is Shiva as the God who resides in our
heart. When ‘Ra‘ is united with ‘m’ it becomes Ram. To make the people cross the Void (Bhavasagara) the arrangement was
made. So, the great power like Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh was created and they were placed in the area of dharma. They have
been Guru Swaroop. Dattatreya and the Adi Gurus incarnated in this world many a time. He incarnated as King Janaka who was
like the father of the Adi Shakti.
After that, He incarnated in Iran as Zoroaster, then as Machindranath, then as Mohammad Saheb and Nanak Sahib. Who is
fighting with whom, just think.. What type of darkness you are in? Fatima, the daughter of Mohammad Sahib was the same who
became daughter of King Janaka. Whom are you fighting? Think over it. The Nanaki of Guru Nanaka was no one else but Janaki.
Shirdi Sai Nath was also an Adi Guru. They are the masters of all. Also, they are my Gurus. These Adi Gurus taught me all this
knowledge. In different incarnations, they kept teaching me.
Ultimately, I had to come and do this work. They could not do it and now they are placing me as a Guru so that I take up the job of
a Guru. This is a strange situation. There was an age when no one was willing to accept a woman as a Guru. But in Kali Yuga,
only a Mother could do this work; it is beyond the power of men. This work could not be done by force, only the love of a Mother
could do it because already there is so much pressure, tension in this world. The day it is forced upon the human being, they will
break down. So, love is the only way out.
Therefore, there was no way other than love.That's why I had to come as Guru.
Everything is acceptable to me. But I didn’t know the qualities of a Guru. Gurus maintain distance but Mother does not keep
distance with the children. Children sit on her head. So, you people also could take liberty with me and I enjoy it. Be with me with
full freedom, you will neither be afraid nor be nervous

. There is no problem, you could come and talk to me boldly about your problems. You could complain to me as you do to your
mother. I am freely available to you, freedom was needed. Religion was required to be discussed openly, there is no secret, no
secret about it.
Ultimately, everything has to be explained very clearly. All the secrets are to be told. Everything is not to be said naywhere. I am
telling all this to you people who are Realised ones, because non-realised people will doubt it. It has some meaning only for the
Realised ones. You could attain much higher state than this.
After that, a lot of work was done on the Bhavsagar. Guru was established so that the Guru would somehow make man cross
this Bhavsagar.
Some were success some were not and few people could get it, they are helpful today. They become eternal (Chiranjeev), the
founder of Jain Dhama. Shri Mahavira and Shri Buddha are amongst them. They were born of the same Mother, born of the
womb of Adi Shakti. Try to know their first relation that where were they born and then how many times they were born. But it
was experimental for all of them. All of them made experiments so that human beings could cross the Void. Very few, however,
could cross the Void. But en-masse Realisation could be done only in Kali Yuga.
After that, Shri Rama incarnated in this world but he forgot that he was an incarnation. He remained in this world as a human
being, not as an incarnation so that you could rise above the Bhavasagara. He was a perfect human being. During his incarnation
a few seekers could get their Realisation, there is no doubt about it. But en-mass Realisation could not be given.
Six or seven thousand years ago, Shri Krishna incarnated on this earth. Shivji, you know that he is always there within.
Right from the beginning of this creation, all the seekers wished to cross the Bhavasagara. The poor seekers had to face lot of
problems. While meditating, they were tortured. So, the Adi Shakti incarnated on this earth 108 times in her perfect form. You
might have read about it. Read Devi Mahatmaya and you will know what I am saying. The Adi Shakti incarnated in the form of the
Devi and recognized the seekers. At that time, She came in the form of the Devi. There was no Maya around Her. So, seekers
could not get their Self-realisation from Her. The only thing they got was her protection. She killed Mahishasura, Shumbha and
Nishumbha and many others. All the rakshasas and negative people who used to torture the saints were killed. But none of them
got salvation because She was not completely human beings. They could see only four chakras, that is up to the heart plexus.
So, Shri Radha incarnated after Shri Sita. She was placed on the fifth chakra, that is the Vishuddhi. She is very human and She
sang the song of love. It is said that at the time of killing the Kansa, the maternal uncle (Kamsa) of Shri Krishna. Shri Radha was
called. Radha – ’Ra’ means energy and ‘dha’ means the sustainer. The stream of Shri Radha starts flowing in you as “Dhara”.
Shaivite people are the followers of Shri Shiva. Shri Krishna and Shri Shiva are the same.
There is no difference between Shri Krishna and Shri Shiva. Except ShriShiva is placed in your heart as soul and Shri Krishna is
on the Vishuddhi. Shri Krishna has sixteen powers. Similarly, you have got sixteen plexuses. It is surprising that Shri Krishna is
the deity of Vishuddhi chakra which has sixteen petals. His power Radha was then divided into two. That is, Rukmini in Dwarika
and Radha in Vrindavan; very humanly.
Shri Krishna had only one son who was Pranava (Divine power) incarnated. Think of it. He was ‘Om’ incarnated. He incarnated on
this earth. His name was Jesus Christ. Mary was his mother. He was placed on the Agnya Chakra. On Agnya one has to face ego
and superego. You see your Agnya Chakra controls your pineal and pituitary bodies; it is scientifically proved. So, he pushes
away the evil spirits from your Agnya because these spirits sit on the superego. They could sit in ego also because Ida and
Pingala nadis cross each other on Agnya Chakra. So, Shri Jesus put his hand on this plexus first of all. It was done at the time of
Nanaka Sahib.

In all ages, these ghostly powers came to do encroachment. But Shri Krishna has such a destructive power that He cut their
throats. So; on Agnya Chakra is the name of Shri Jesus. Shri Mahalakshmi, whose praise we sing so frequently, no one has
described Her. Where is She placed? She is Mary Herself. Whenever She incarnates with her child and husband, She is very
peaceful. But when she comes alone, then She is [unclear]. So, this plexus belongs to Bhagawati. The plexus of Sahasrara
belongs to Bhagawati. She Herself pierces it, all the seven chakras are there in it. Therefore, the Maya (illusion) also has seven
layers. It is very difficult to recognise Her. Seven human chakras get completed here.
In nut shell, I have told you what you have to do, how you have to complete your seeking. But if we talk about it methodically then
we could say that there is no particular time for it. All the times we could be in the state of thoughtless awareness. For example,
you are sitting in a thoughtless state, start thinking, then go into thoughtlessness.
After there is thoughtless awareness and then comes the doubtless awareness. You will have doubts but in the second stage
you get the doubtless awareness. Doubts will be there: is right or not? What Shri Mataji has said is not right? How could it be?
Has it happened or not? Have we got Realisation or not? This sort of doubts will come. How will these doubts be eradicated?
When you have been given a seat, I mean when you are seated on the throne and you have doubts as to whether it is a throne
where I am sitting? Is it all right or not? You could check it by your own hands, that now an unparalleled energy is flowing from
your hands. When you will cure people by touching them with your hands, when you will have such experiences then slowly and
slowly your doubts will vanish. I mean that I have prepared a boat for you, now you have to launch it in the water, fight with the
waves, only then you will come to know whether it is a boat or not. Maybe it is some wood only. The boat has been built or not
could be tested by launching it into water and by rowing it on the waves. If it withstands the pressure of the waves then you will
be sure of it. Otherwise, doubts will remain.in the same way you have to test your Realisation because man thinks no end of
himself.
One person out of our seekers went somewhere, a swamiji was sitting with a flag. Thousands people come there, have their food
etc. This gentleman went to America with us.Just with the movement of his hand he used to do things. You can also do it. With
the movement of your hands, you could raise the kundalini of someone. Sitting here you move your hands and see how nice it is
that the kundalini of the other person will move with your fingers. The energy which is flowing from your hands will do it.
So, this way that person used to raise kundalini of 300-300 people. Since many people were going to him the Sahaja Yogi also
went to him. I come to know of everything as to who is hanging about and where. When he returned, I asked, “Why did you touch
his feet?” He said that, “Since everyone was touching his feet, I also touched”. I said, “You have to touch the feet of only those
who are older to you”. I asked him what was his condition, what was the condition of his kundalini, is he Realised? He replied,
“No, he is not Realised.” His kundalini is overturned. I asked him, “You raise the kundalini of thousands of seekers with the
movements of your fingers. Why could you not think that you should not have touched his feet?” His kundalini is overturned; at
least he should have been a Realised person to touch his feet. One should touch the feet of one who is higher than yourself.
Otherwise, why to touch the feet at all? You know everything. You know the reason of it. You have the complete knowledge of it.
You are so expert in it. why did you touch his feet?
You become egoless. You all live in such an unassuming way that no one could believe that you are Realized. One becomes
egoless. Completely egoless. He feels, how it has happened, how that has happened? But it has happened. If this transformation
has taken place in you. Then you should think, “Why has this transformation taken place in you only?” Many people live in Delhi.
Why we have specially been given Realization? There might be some reason. You might have been seeking for many lives. It is
your right. You are saints, saints of high orders. You are not aware of this fact. If you were not saints, how could I give Realization
to you? Can I give Realization to stones? Thousands of people come but I cannot give Realization to all of them. Only a few of
you have got it. Definitely, there is some reason for it.
But you cannot believe it. You think, how could it be? This problem comes because of you are egoless. In a very ordinary way;
you neither change the style of your clothes nor any other showing-off. But you will see that you have become peaceful within.
You are now an altogether different being. The style of your talking and doing things is of a Realized one. And you will become

expert. You know about others that such and such chakra of this person is catching, that is why he is behaving abnormally. Let
me set it right. And within a little time, that person is cooled down. Some people come to quarrel with me, but Sahaja Yogis calm
them down by moving their Kundalini. They play many tricks and within a little time, such people sit quietly.
One fellow came and started quarrelling. It was the time for him to take some pills. They put the pills on their hand and vibrated
them. As soon as he ate those pills, immediately he went into meditation.
If someone is disturbing you too much then put your finger in the water and make him drink that vibrated water. The work will be
done. Chaitanya will awaken within that person. But still, you are newly born children. Small child gets ill very soon, similarly you
also catch very soon. You have to stick to your position otherwise you will descend very soon. Don’t leave your position, do not
be shaken. Stick to your place because the boon given to you is such that one could be unsteady. I am telling it to you. Therefore,
power of collectivity should be there.
There are people amongst you who come and tell, “Shri Mataji my head is catching”. Collectively you could clear the catches,
whether it is in your waist, Agnya Chakra or anywhere else, you could clear it yourself. Now these Sahaja Yogis are your brothers
and sisters. This is the new world of love. These are your relatives. You know them. At the time of difficulty, you will be surprised
that they will run to help you. Because Deities are there with you for your protection. Suddenly if you think about someone,
immediately you find him before you and saying, “I don’t know how I came here! I was going this way, I thought to come up to
you”. All your works are done, you will not meet with accidents. Deities are hovering over you.
If one Sahaja Yogi is there at the place of accident, then all others are also saved because of him. Many things will happen. You
keep on witnessing and write your experiences. Watch the awakening and movements of your Kundalini. There is going to be no
problem in it. Sometimes it will tickle here and move there; sometimes it will enlighten here and sometimes there. Your
consciousness, which is connected to all these things, will get enlightened and it will enlighten the whole world.
Now you are sitting here, but you are not aware that thousands and millions of rays of Divine love are flowing. You will see that
the whole atmosphere of Delhi will change; you will see it. I went to Calcutta only once. Have you seen the atmosphere there? I
said it there itself that the atmosphere of Calcutta will change. I stayed there for eight days and the whole atmosphere changed,
the minds of people were calmed down.
Today, in Maharashtra it is going on very well. The reason is that many people have got their Realisation. Now it is the turn of
Delhi State. The Kundalini of the whole world is situated in India. How tremendous! The seat of Kundalini of the whole world is in
India. If our India improves, then the whole world will improve. The Sahasrara of the whole world is here. So, I need thousand
Indians who could give Realisation.
May God Bless you.

1973-1207, Sahaja Yoga ki Utpatti, The origin of Sahaja Yoga
View online.
7 December 1973
Sahaja Yoga Ki Utpatti, The Origin Of Sahaja Yoga
Public Program
Birla Kreeda Kendra, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED | Translation (Hindi to English) - Reviewed
"The Origin of Sahaja Yoga", Public program, Birla Sport Center, Bombay (India), 12 July 1973
Love does not have any language, so there are no words to describe it. When our mother loves us, how can she describe her
love? Similarly, when God Almighty loved us and created this universe, He had no words to describe His love.
When a human being has prepared their instrument, that’s when they can begin to praise God. I have not been given a particular
subject for discussion today by the organisers of the program as we have three days to fully understand everything.
Today I will talk about evolution.
What I say will be hypothetical. All scientific experiments begin with a hypothesis. Hypothesis means: whatever is the discovery
of science, that assumption should be presented to the audience, and the truth within that hypothesis is researched. The day
that hypothesis is proven, that’s when it is considered a law of science. Similarly, what I say is a hypothesis to you, that can be
proven and shown to you all.
Also, all that has been documented and observed in historic documents can prove this hypothesis. But the proof should not be in
accepting what is being said in documents or by a certain person but should be in the experience.
Today I will talk about evolution. It is the day of "pratham" [beginning] and I will explain the relationship of this day with Sahaja
Yoga. It is said that Brahma is beyond evolution, Brahma is separate from that which we consider to be awareness. Vibrations
are a form of Brahma. Whatever exists is a form of Brahma. Just like a seed manifests itself into a complete tree and then that
tree ends up being a seed again, in the same way, Brahma manifests Himself in a number of forms and then again transforms
into a seed, and limitless universes emerge from that seed.
We can consider the seed of Brahma just like the seed of a plant. We can call it the seed of Brahma [Brahma Beeja]. Every seed
has a certain power of evolution. Every seed is comparable. Similarly, the power of evolution of Brahma is known as Brahma and
the power of Brahma.
Why did God Almighty have to create this universe when He is complete in Himself? Because however rich or accomplished a
human being may be, he is never satisfied until he produces an offspring. They think, “Who is all this wealth for?” There are a
number of very rich people in the world that are childless who try very hard to have at least one child to whom they can pass on
their gathered wealth and reveal it to their child. In the same manner when that feeling of love took birth within God Almighty, the
powers flowing in Him gathered and got founded as Brahma or Adi Shakti. So, what remains out of this process, in the centre, is
God.
These scientists tell me that they do not believe in God. You may not believe in God, but you trust your heart and what resides in
your heart is God. The One who is God Almighty is reflected in our hearts as Spirit and He is our constant witness. He is a
witness to every deed of ours and is watching everything. He is the soul, also described by words such as Spirit, spiritual, and as
human Spirit, when he takes birth.

The one who resides as a witness in our heart is God Almighty. His Agnya power, in the beginning, is equipped to begin the
creation of the universe. At that time three forms of transformation come into that power, or we can say that it transforms itself
into three forms. First, it gets the desire that, “I should have an offspring, a creation.” Due to this desire, she embeds Tamo Guna
within Herself. I have described this to you before as to how it takes place and what direction does it goes into. There is no
blackboard available right now to explain this flow in a diagram to you at the moment.
This desire is critical to the creation of Valaya of Tamo Guna. All of the Valaya moves with the Bindu Matra power of Agnya. You
will be surprised to know that a bindu when it revolves to its original position, it’s “valaya”, is parabolic. Einstein said that every
movement is parabolic. You must have noticed in temples of Shiva, that the power of Shiva is parabolic in shape. According to
Einstein anything that moves, moves in a parabolic direction. Similarly, we can say that love also moves in a parabolic direction.
And Valaya also moves in parabolic direction and returns to the same position from where it started. That’s what parabolic
movement is. In that sense, we can say that first shape, the Valaya created Tamo Guna in the universe. As a fan has three
blades, in the same way, if you can imagine, the first parabolic movement was started. As a fan has three blades, in the same
way, if you can imagine, the first parabolic movement was started.
Second, when you desire something, an event has to take place for that. Some work had to be done. Without some work it could
not happen. Thus, some activating forces took birth that founded Rajo Guna. As a consequence of the second parabolic
movement, Rajo Guna was founded. And with this movement was that of desire that all love should be showered over the
creation. Showering love on your creation, your offspring, is revelation and this is what creates Sattvo Guna.
So, we can see that from one thing these three gunas are created. Such permutations and combinations are what creates this
universe and within that, this Earth gets created. The creation of Earth also took place out of a parabolic movement.
Now, for those who have studied science, the theory of explosion is well founded in people’s mind. A decade ago, I also used to
say that an explosion had taken place. Without such an explosion, this evolution of ours could not have taken place. This state of
evolution has been brought by multiple explosions. But people now have started saying that a certain mass exploded in an
unexpected manner and resulted in different systems like solar system, so today science is saying the same thing.
After the creation of this Earth, another explosion took place that brought life on Earth.
As you know, the very first living beings were single-celled amoeba. After that, slowly we reached the state of being a human
being. We don’t have to go into the details of evolution. But if we think more deeply on that topic, one well known biologist
named Du Noüy [French mathematician and biologist] has written that if a human being was created by chance, then how is it
possible that it took such a short time for living beings to take human form. This was not by chance. This type of creation cannot
take place just like that. There was a force behind it, someone was doing this work, someone was giving pace to this evolution
and taking care of it and was leading it, without which not even an amoeba could not have taken birth in this universe. This is
called the law of chance in science.
These biologists do not say ‘God’ but they say, “We do not know of a human but must be a force that has created this universe.”
Even saying this much by them is good enough.
When human beings look at the creation, they find themselves different from all animals. It is hard for us to imagine how
different we are from animals. It is surprising to believe that we have evolved from the animal to human stage. But it is not hard
to believe this if you think we can never go to the moon. About twenty-five to thirty years back we could not even think of going to
the Moon. Even if anyone thought like that, people would laugh at them; it was considered impossible. Today if man has reached
the moon, it is also a step towards evolution.
You may have noticed that spacecrafts launched into space have four explosions built in them. The first explosion takes them to
a certain distance. Suppose their speed is 10,000 km/h. The second explosion increases their speed about tenfold. The third

explosion increases the speed of another tenfold. Fourth explosion increases the speed by yet another tenfold. If these
explosions did not take place, then with the same initial speed the spacecrafts could never reach the Moon.
The same thing has happened in the evolution of mankind. To reach a progressive state of evolution a forceful explosion took
place. That’s how human beings have reached a state in a very small period of time, in a surprisingly short period, where he can
learn a lot and understand a lot. But he still has to learn a lot more.
What is causing our heart to beat? If you ask this question to doctors, of any well-educated, reputable doctors, they will all have
one response that, “It is caused by the autonomic nervous system.” Mankind is not able to go beyond this. They have been only
able to name this phenomenon. If we ask how is our state functioning, then they will say there is an organisation called
Government of India which is doing the work. This is not a very scientific response because this answer does not explain what
this organisation is, how it functions and how it executes. Just giving it a name has not answered the question. But science has
not evolved just to give a name to a phenomenon but to explain how this evolution, this universe, this genesis, all this took place.
Whether science reaches that goal or not, you all can reach there. The viewpoint of science is very analytical. As you know, there
is one doctor for one hand and there is a different doctor for the other hand. It is very hard to get comprehensive knowledge from
science.
Like we see a tree and all the flowers on the tree. Some people say that the colour of this flower should be yellow, some say this
flower should be blue. Only if one reaches the source of it all, can they explain the behaviour of the tree: why the flowers are of
different colours, why the leaves are all different to each other, because you haven’t reached the root of the subject.
Here in Mumbai, when we talk to people, they say, “Mother, people do not have food here, there is no sugar available, why are you
talking about God?” This is right for people to say. People say, “What are you, after all, during such periods?” But if you think for a
moment, why is this all happening that in our country there is not enough ration to feed public. In America people are committing
suicide, running away from their homes, going mad, where is there no human crisis. If you talk to anyone in the world, it will seem
like everyone is in grave difficulties. Whether people have food or not, children or not, there is not one single happy person in the
world. If food makes people happy, then why I don’t see people with full stomachs being happy either?
What is the reason that they are breaking down and disintegrating slowly? The reason is that if the tree becomes too big and
expands a lot outwardly, but does not get in touch with its own source and roots then it starts to disintegrate.
It is important that we know where we get all the power from and research the source from which we take the power. Until we
reach the source of that power, each and every human being in every country, it will all disintegrate. This world will have to come
to an end. The One that gives origin, vitality; the One that is Chaitanya itself, until we discover it, we will all become devoid of
awareness; we will be as good as dead. The world will come to an end.
So, you can understand how important it is to find that power that is going on in our hearts as heartbeats, and it is our
responsibility to know what it is. This power within all of us is working our digestion, our respiration. So, go and find out what is
this power. Otherwise the whole universe, this Creation of God will come to an end.
And this responsibility lies with the mankind. It is only the human being, today, who is standing at the edge of the universe. Today
humans have this power within themselves that they can learn about. Animals like dogs and cats cannot understand that.
Do I have to go to the forest, to the dogs and cats, to suggest that they learn about their power? It is only you that I have to tell,
again and again, that you must get to know this power that is responsible for our life. And you see the result of not being familiar
with this power: there is no peace for humanity; they go to forests, leave their homes, leave this world, but there is no peace for
them, there is no joy. Their power is weakening and they are struggling.
It can be simply explained that the fuel that has been filled in you, the fuel of the power that has been filled in you, that power is
going to guide you. One should use this power. If the fuel filled within you is not used the instrument is wasted. This is important.

But the process to refill the fuel is not available because when a child turns three years of age the opening to fill the fuel is
closed. And the way that fuel is being filled within him is broken down.
This power is called the power of Kundalini. You must have read and heard thousands of things about the power of Kundalini.
But I believe that very few people have knowledge of this power. Reading whatever has been written. Writing by copying what
has been written, is no real writing.
If you come, join our meditation program, we will show you the movement of Kundalini within you.
Below the spine in the triangular bone resides the Kundalini. You can see it. Its movement, its rise and fall, you can witness it with
the movement of your hands. A number of doctors in our country and a number of psychologists have got their Realisation and
they have been able to feel this power. They accept this fact. But who listens to them? Who even listens to me? Maybe in another
ten years, if this concept comes from America, then we will pay attention to it, because it is hard for us to believe that anyone can
do something like this, so how can a simple housewife do a work like this?
Actually, since childhood I could see the Kundalini and knew everything about it, but I didn’t understand why humans are the way
they are. Why do they think that they are Shivaji Maharaj while watching a theatre play? Why does he forget that he is doing a
play? Little children create their games and they play them and then throw all that away. No one gets attached with those games.
But here we think that any game is our own game.
Little children make homes in their games and break them. But we play this game and get attached to this game. Little children
make a play house and then leave it, create something else to play with, then leave that too. Children come to our meditation
program and ask Shri Mataji, “Why are you playing this doctor game?” They think this whole world is a game. Why is it that when
we grow up we do not take this as a game? What is there to get so serious about it?
Like, some villagers were travelling by plane, so they carried their luggage on their heads. So, someone asked them, “Why are you
doing that?” They replied very seriously that they are trying to reduce the burden of the plane! This is what we are doing! In reality,
we have no work. We don’t have to do anything, just like the work of this microphone is to take my voice to you, but if the
microphone starts thinking that it is its own job to speak, then I will have a problem with that. So, if the microphone starts
speaking, then my voice will come to an end.
We don’t actually do anything. Like if these fingers think and one finger thinks that, “I am special and I have to do something
special.” This finger is part of this body and is running on the same power as the rest of the body is. It is a part and parcel of the
body, just a body part, but we think of this finger as separate. We are all running on the same power. It is possible that this finger
has been exchanged in the same way that we have been exchanged or have moved away from this power.
All these lights here are being enlightened by the same power. It is possible, that one light bulb is taken out and is attached to a
battery separately, but the battery is also charged by the same electricity. Maybe it is possible, that you all have separated
yourselves taking your own powers.
There are two types of powers flowing in a human being. With one he fills it and with the other he expands it. And two
organisations called ego and superego develop and cover his whole being. And that is why he gets separate from this
All-pervading Power.
This is what I need to open within you. As soon as it opens, you get to know this power and you experience peace within. Not just
that you get peace, but also patience. You are completely relaxed. It is very important. And what is important is that it takes
place. It has to take place.
For example, when we see an object falling, we tend to prevent it. Similarly, to stop the collapse of this world, God Almighty has
invented Sahaja Yoga. Sahaja Yoga is not produced by Me. No discovery is ever done by us anyway. Just like the discovery of

gravity: it was not done by us; gravity was always there, we only discovered it.
What is within you and what is your birth right, I have discovered. You can have it. And to find it, I have spent a lot of time. And
now it has been found.
This knowledge will need to be spread all over. Spreading this knowledge will take away all your problems. Especially today’s
youth, seeing them you all are perplexed that what has happened to them. As if there is no control on them, something has to be
done for them. There is no other way to fix them other than Sahaja Yoga.
For children, Sahaja Yoga works very fast; children get it unusually fast. Whenever I have made this arrangement in schools, I
have seen that eighty percent of the children get it immediately. The same small children, when they go to high school, it takes
them longer then. It drops to sixty to seventy percent in that age group.
But students in India, who knows what are they made of. It is very difficult for them. Some universities invited Me and the Vice
Chancellors of those places come and tell Me, “Mataji, please do something or we will be shamed: these children are like
monkeys and you have to fix them!” I say, “Why Me? They say, “No, we cannot do anything now. No, we won’t do anything.” These
children have really reduced themselves to such a low level.
The Hippie’s movement has entered America but it is to come here too and you have to be careful about that. To ignore that
problem is not going to solve the issue. If you think about the progress of your country and that of other countries too, then
remember that the whole responsibility lies on the youth. They will have to be corrected via Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja Yoga means God Almighty’s love. And only a Realised person can do it. Only the one who is laden with this love, and
within whom this power is flowing, can do this work.
Those in Sahaja Yoga will get Realisation, they are the ones in the end to achieve this. But there are very few people. You will be
surprised that after working hard for five years in Mumbai, in reality there are about one thousand realised people only; with a lot
of difficulty, and they too have not reached there. And out of all those there are only eleven people who are able to give
Realisation to others.
People get their Self-realisation very quickly in America but their style is different. They change Gurus on a daily basis. One needs
to measure its depth. We do not realise how critical it is, how urgently it is needed. We do not understand that. The moment that
we understand it will be a fortunate moment not just for us but for the whole universe.
I will continue to appeal to you. I will continue to say as a mother will continuously remind her children, but the children should
feel the hunger themselves. If they do not have an appetite then the mother can run around them and plead to them as much as
she can.
Those who get their Self-realisation, and are equipped with this power, never have to face any disease. And even if it comes, they
can cure it, because they are given the knowledge as to how to cure which disease and how. This power is called ‘spiritual
awareness flowing in your hands’ by Adi Shankaracharya in his books. But no one is reading those books any more these days.
With these vibrations, you can do good for others too, while also doing good for yourselves. These people become free of
disease, and they make others free of disease and get longevity. They not only get longevity but they achieve joy and happiness
and on top of that they achieve collective consciousness, which has not been felt or learnt about by anyone thus far.
People do not know what collective consciousness is. Lots of people have talked about collective consciousness but nothing
specific or clear. When you go into meditation, that’s when you will understand what we mean by collective consciousness. What
it means is that we can understand other people’s vibrations, we can understand the movement of other’s Kundalini, when we
raise someone’s Kundalini with our love. We also understand the blockages in her way and remove them.

Sitting here you can feel Nixon’s Kundalini. It sounds surprising but yes, you can feel it. That way you can understand what
trouble he is in, what his blockage is and where the vibrations are stopping. It is not a biased assessment, that you don’t like
someone or hate someone. When you are removing someone’s Kundalini blockages and remove their obstacles, they will only
get well-being. It will only be for their good.
There is no better voluntary service or social service out there because while doing this the person does not think that this hand
is doing something good for the other hand. It is an automatic phenomenon that if one hand gets hurt, the other hand is raised to
make it feel better.
Tomorrow I will explain what Sahaja Yoga is, what is its meaning, how to progress with it and how to get into it.
The introduction given to you today is that there is no salvation in the world without Sahaja Yoga. All the other yoga methods out
there, whatever they could achieve, they cannot help you attain salvation. If the world has to get its salvation then one has to
embrace Sahaja Yoga. That is the path to God Almighty. He is the one who is doing this work. All you have to do is to know it.
The only thing is that Sahaja Yoga works in your freedom: if you do not embrace it completely from within, it will not work.
There was a gentleman who asked me to give him Realisation. He came and stayed with me for four days but he did not get it.
He was perplexed that regular, simple housewives can get it, then why not him. He said, “Why am I not getting Realisation?” So, I
said to him that, “The reason you are not getting Realisation is not because of me, but you. I am making efforts to give you
Realisation but it is not because of me that you are not getting it.” So, he asked me, “Then what is the reason for it?” So, I said,
“The reason is that you have to develop that love from within. You have to have that feeling towards yourself too. The day you
develop that love, you will yourself get the Realisation.” Then he took his bath at 4 a.m. and sat for meditation and got his
Realisation.
It seems like a wonderful and unique thing because it is a wonderful thing. It’s not that wonderful things do not happen in the
world. It should be adopted. One should not doubt it or be suspicious about it.
Today we have talked from evolution to human beings. Now where do humans have to go forward from here? But despite our
saying and indicating the direction, the work is not proceeding forward. Whether you have this need within you or not, you have
this desire in you or not, or are you still lost in something non-living, a lot depends on that.
Tomorrow we will discuss what is in Sahaja Yoga, what do you achieve in Sahaja Yoga, these topics in detail.
People were of opinion about today’s program that without meditation there is no value of Shri Mataji’s program, which is true
also: meditation should take place. Those who would want to meditate and achieve this, can stay back. Shortly, we will have
meditation. After meditation, we will also see how many people can actually achieve it.
Tomorrow a meditation program has been scheduled for 9.30 a.m. You all should attend that. Both those who get Realisation
today, and also those who do not get it today, should attend that program because we should devote some time to God.
We do not give any time to God. We go to the cinema and sit there for three hours but how many hours do we sit for God. The
time we give to God is when we are doing something, when we are performing a puja, or remembering him. There is no value of
those things. First let your connection get established with God. Without any connection who are you inviting and who are you
remembering?
Whoever wants to stay for meditation, please stay back for a little while. Those who do not wish to meditate, please leave now as
it is not a good idea to disturb others during meditation because these people are seeking God. We should respect them.

You should not get up and go during the meditation. The meditation will take about 20 to 25 minutes. Those who have already
got their Realisation, can sit towards the back.

1973-1208, Public Program
View online.
8 December 1973
Public Program
Birla Kreeda Kendra, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
The energy (Shakti) runs in the middle runs downwards our vertebral column into the triangular bone ends up and establishes
herself there. This we call as Kundalini.
In the central path, the energy (shakti) descends in the vertebral column ending up in the triangular bone, which we call as
Kundalini because she coils up herself in three and a half coils. And the other two powers which I am showing, as well enter our
triangular, pendulum-like, prism-like brain crossing over, descends downwards as I have shown you. Like this, I have shown you
these three powers (Shaktis). One goes in the middle and the other two on the sides (Left and right channels). Other than this
there are other powers (energies) in the brain that enter which I am not showing. Which we call the central nervous system.
These three institutions which I am showing, the one in the middle, we call that as kundalini.
Other than this these two institutions (channels) which cross over that we are seeing, after crossing over has two flows. One is
outside, and the other is inside. The one that flows inside is the one filled in with petrol (energy). The energy that flows outside is
the one we go outwards and get attached to, have involvement with. Animals don’t any involvement, human beings do. “This is
mine. This is my son, this is my brother. This is my house. This is my country.” Mine, my ness comes in us because of this energy
which is flowing within us, pulls us outwardly. We very easily go outwardly. It’s like you have your attention on me quite easily.
But if I ask you a simple thing is to put your attention inside yourself. You can’t do it. Nothing simpler thing than this doing. But
things don’t happen. The reason is the energy that flows outwardly is more powerful and this energy gives us the name of
sympathetic in our nervous system, which is the reason we use the energy flowing in us. And we bring it in our use. This is our
sympathetic nervous system. And the one which stabilizes the flowing of energy is our parasympathetic. This means the one
which comes within us and establishes inside. Because of these two powers, we develop the two institutions named as ego and
superego within us. And because of these two (ego and superego) our brain gets covered, we easily forget the all-pervading,
all-encompassing divine power.
The three and a half coiled kundalini when descending, immediately its length is increased and so gets disjointed in the middle.
Because of this break of the kundalini in the Sushumna Nadi (channel), where the kundalini descends, there is a gap created. The
vacuum is created. This vacuum is outside the abdomen (stomach), if there are doctors present here, may know the vagus nerve
and aortic plexus. Likewise, we also have that vacuum in us. This is the Void. This Bhavasagara (ocean of illusion) is created
primordially. In the beginning, the Adi Kundalini (Primordial Kundalini) was created. And from that, the Supreme Divine Being
(Paramatma) created the universe. And it’s complete reflection is the human being. The whole creation of God’s reflection is the
human being. As the child embodies life, there is the beating of his heart, likewise, Shiva, Ishwar (Supreme Being), the one who I
spoke about yesterday, He is seated in your hearts. And He looks like a thumb (like a candle flame). You can also see it, not that
you can’t. It’s like if you have a microscope you can see if you don’t you can’t. It doesn’t mean if you cannot see if you don’t have
the microscope. This is the Jiva (life) in the heart, and we call it Jivatma (self, soul). People call it a soul. And when it establishes
itself in the body, people call it Jivatma (living soul/self).
Kundalini as I mentioned you is a power (shakti) and in the heart is Shiva, is the light like a flame. Shiva and Shakti are both in a
human being. Their union is necessary. Otherwise, in the human essence, there is no establishment of Brahma’s (Divine)
essence. Like you have seen the gas light here. I find it very interesting. You must notice in it that there is a small light (flicker)
that burns and then the whole gas light comes up when it is fully opened. Likewise, enlightenment happens in a human being.
She (kundalini) comes exactly from the Divine essence, that first the power of Shiva in the heart is touched, and the Shakti
(kundalini), or you can call Adishakti (primordial power/energy), and Shiva who is Himself the Supreme Divine, in the witness

form, is in the heart and the Shakti (Kundalini) is activated which is in the triangular bone (sacrum), is our spiritual mother. I wish
I could show you the pulsation of this power/energy (Shakti).
Here I have spent years trying to convince people. I don’t understand for such an important thing why should one argue so much.
In the end this is for your benevolence and auspiciousness, and for those who have achieved it they know it. But one would get
crazy explaining this to people. If tomorrow I place a diamond here and say to you that it is placed here, anybody can take it.
Nobody would fight, debate, or have an argument with me. One would grab the diamond and run. He won’t even think if it is real
or fake. Like that there are thousands of diamonds that are enlightened due to this shakti (kundalini), and for that shakti, I have
to keep on convincing the whole world. Sometimes I ponder that my whole life will go to waste? Won’t there be the people who
would understand me in this world?Because I am talking about giving this power (enlightenment) ‘en masse’. Talking about
giving this (self-realization) to lots. Not few, but to multitudes, is what I am thinking. But whoever over is half baked. Not wanting
completely. And that’s why, although I shouldn’t say this, if you understand me, I am doing whatever I can do.
Within us in the middle, centrally is the void. Likewise, the void is where the Adishakti (Primordial Energy) was. And in the void we
know, on the Nabhi our mother as we all know gives us our nourishment. Gives us the blood in the womb. Similarly, the Adishakti
mother gives her blood (nourishment) to this primordial human being, or the imagination of primordial human being we can say
which has been placed in the Nabhi. Like when we want to create a big organization, we think that we need to have a chairman, a
vice-chairman, two or three secretaries in it. Like this, we create different people or positions. Similarly, the Primordial Mother
(Adishakti) before making the human being thought of all this, and so from the five elements, the earth was created, which also
is another big lecture which we will leave it for next time. I will show you only the things that you can see. For these five elements
the power that was created, needed a guardian to look after. The establishment of that guardian is necessary. The construction
of the universe would be only done after the establishment if the guardian. For this reason on the Nabhi chakra, Shri Vishnu was
created. This is true, and I can prove it scientifically.
I have not come here with any specialty towards Hinduism (Hindu Dharma) or any dharma (religion). All religions have their
uniqueness. The only thing is there is no liveliness in us. Shri Vishnu is verily established in our Nabhi, because when I awaken
people’s kundalini and when the Nabhi chakra is in problem, what I have noticed as soon as Shri Vishnu’s name is recited the
Nabhi chakra clears out. But the name should not be recited by a non realized person. Non realized person is just like when you
try to phone someone without any connection in the phone line. A realized person while giving realization should see if the
kundalini is rising above the Nabhi or not, on that he should take the name of Shri Vishnu and with the recital of Shri Vishnu’s
name the kundalini will rise. With the establishment of Shri Vishnu, Shri Lakshmi is his power, which we all know. It is very good
that in India (Hindustan) we have listened to these stories in our childhood from our grandmothers. Now in the next lives what
will happen to the people I can’t say? But knowing the present situation lot of people know about Shri Vishnu. Shri Vishnu is a
form or an image of God. But he is beyond the form.
In psychology, Jung and other famous psychologists have said, that a human in his dreams has projected such symbols, which
are universal, collective and sees similar things everywhere. For example, if a person is going to die and if there is any weapon
that would be used, then he sees a special triangular object (in his dream) and this could be whether he is Chinese, or Indian, or
American, educated or uneducated. And like these, there are a thousand examples, whereby one can conclude that there is a
special power within us, which has been called Unconscious. Universal Unconscious. Like this, there is some power which
presents within us and is out everywhere. This power which is in special symbolic form is also within us in subtle for, which we
establish ourselves into our spirituality, then we feel it or see it.
Shri Vishnu’s seat is in our Nabhi chakra on this Nabhi, Shri Vishnu who is swaying on this ocean is the ocean of love. It is said
that from Shri Vishnu’s navel, Brahmadeva was born (created), is true, and had to be worked out from the Nabhi. On this Nabhi
the Primordial Mother (Adishakti) created Shri Brahmadeva, who fabricated the whole world. In this, there is no religion involved.
I tell you that all the religions (dharmas) are established in our kundalini, need to integrate outwardly, all religions should be
brought together, why talk unnecessary nonsense. We are integrated within ourselves. We are sublimated within ourselves. At
least try to look within ourselves. When the universe was first created, the Supreme Being (Paramatma) created firstly Shri
Ganesha. It has a reason, Shri Gauriji (before meeting Shiva), the one who is the Adishakti created Shri Ganesha, who is his
mother. Those people who feel vibrations, they know the earth (Mother Earth) also emits vibrations. Gauri who is herself

Adishakti personified, from her body created him, meaning Shri Ganesha was created with vibrations. The making of Shri
Ganesha is very necessary because Shri Ganesha is an immortal universal child. Who is the incarnation of auspiciousness?
Auspiciousness is his dharma (virtue), auspiciousness is his karma (action), and he lives inauspiciousness. So this Shri Ganesha
who was created, in the Mooladhara at the bottom, as I have shown you, was established by his mother, Shri Gauri. Otherwise,
the whole creation will be wasted if the auspiciousness is removed from this universe. Today people are madly after destroying
auspiciousness. You don’t know those who call themselves modern, intellectuals, who disturb the auspiciousness, don’t know
that auspiciousness is the very foundation of the human race.
This a lot of people might not like it. I apologize for that. But the truth is that without auspiciousness the whole universe can get
disturbed. That’s why Shri Ganesha is first. Why Shri Ganesha was not established in our Swadishthana and down in the
Mooladhara? There is a special reason. Because he came with one prime chakra of Shri Gauri, the first chakra, the foundation
chakra. It is said that Shri Gauri after creating him placed him at the door of her bathroom. It’s very symbolic. When she was
having a bath, to protect her auspiciousness, she is a mother, mother for her auspiciousness places a small child. The meaning
of this is when we want to establish ourselves in our dharma (righteousness/virtues), whenever we want to connect with
Supreme Divine, God (Paramatma), then we should be innocent by nature like a small innocent baby, towards the power (Shakti)
who is the Kundalini, in the motherly form in us. A lot of people today are using sex as a topic, that we should sublimate
ourselves towards sex (carnal), and then the kundalini will be awakened. Understand this very clearly. Just talking about mother
and relation of sex is disgusting. Kundalini your mother is seated here (Mooladhara). You are already sublimated. Your mother
(kundalini) is so very auspicious. She accompanies you in your past and presents lives. She has cared for you right up-till now.
And now when I try to awaken her within you, like you she says to me, “no first please cure my child, my child’s this chakra is
caught, first cure it.” For this reason, I have to cure your health firstly.
If your brain is disturbed then the brain had to be cooled down. Then the kundalini rises properly. Such a mother who only wants
to give you. Who resides in you give you your rebirth, with her you are only doing injustice to her. In my view, no greater injustice
is done under the name of intellectualism. I say that even when people crucified Christ, it is not an issue, but those who insult
their mother (Kundalini), loses the kundalini. Not only the kundalini lies in the dormant state for lifelong, but by insulting her she
only gets angry and manifests in anger on the two channels (Nadis) Ida and Pingala. By this heat the person gets disturbed,
jumps, and shouts/yells in pain, and not only that, his body gets blisters. Therefore people say not to touch (awaken) the
kundalini. These are the same people who themselves don’t understand mother’s auspiciousness, same people who don’t
recognize themselves to be innocent like a small child, which they have to become. These explanation (about sex) are by those
people have gone in the wrong path and want to delude others, like the people of rakshasa (demon) category. These people by
their sinister wrongdoings have deluded others by teaching, justifying sex with one's mother, sublimate the sex. Sex in our body
is an outlet, like the bathroom (toilet) in our house. On that entrance ( of Mooladhara chakra) the Divine Mother has established
Shri Ganesha so that people don’t perform any inauspicious activities and enter inside wrongly.
All these people (false gurus/Tantrikas) are doing unauthorized work. That is where you read how this kundalini is awakened,
with big names and titles given to it. And so many of these people come to my attention. Sometimes I get very surprised how
these people get the kundalini awakened? And now they say their kundalini is awakened. And say exactly at 5 O’clock their
kundalini was awakened. Now one must think, does God has a clock that He will enlighten you exactly at 5 O’Clock. This is a
living work, that spontaneously awakens within you and transforms you. For example, a flower will transform into a fruit. Can we
say,” Sir, this is a flower, and at 5 O’Clock it will turn into a fruit.” Can anyone say that? This is all black magic, satanic worshiping.
I will talk about these tomorrow. Today will talk only auspicious topics.
Before awakening this kundalini, Shri Ganesha should be invoked/worshipped within. It’s always done and should be. There is no
question of religion or non-religion. Shri Ganesha is not contracted to only Hindus. Hindus might think that they are the
contractors of Shri Ganesha. Recently when I went to Pune lot of Brahmins opposed me saying, “we won’t let you lecture here.”
So I said, “those Brahmins who have come please come forward, I want to see who is a Brahmin?” So these Brahmins were
shaking before me. So I asked, “what is this?”. They said (Brahmins). “You are (to Shri Mataji) a Shakti, that’s why (we are
shaking). So I (Shri Mataji) said, “can I give the discourse or not?” They said, “we couldn’t believe first, now we would sit and
listen. After that, they got self-realization, and now laughingly admit to me, “how stupid we were”. Who is a Brahmin? Unless and

until you get transformed, unless and until you don’t become twice-born (Dwija), unless and until you have your rebirth
(self-realization), till then you are not a Brahmin.
Similarly, when I went to Tehran, there in Mundo, the people said, “She is a kafir (infidel), the people everywhere think I am no
good, all the religions. “ Don’t listen to what She says, She can’t read namaz.” So I said, “you only make people read namaz, you
need to understand.” So they said, “we are Muslims.” So I (Shri Mataji) said, “explain to me the meaning of a Musalman (Muslim).
Musalman means the one who is reborn (self-realized). Are you?” So they said, “Yes we have.” So I said, “then read namaz
(prayers) in front of me.” The namaz was read, but their condition was not good. I (Shri Mataji) said, “if you are Musalman, you
can’t keep your hands in front of me for two minutes. You can’t keep your eyes closed, it flickers. So they said, “You are doing
some kind of magic.” I said, “yes I am doing magic, I am doing mantras if you are a true Musalamn then try and stop me.” You
cannot control things the way you like in the name of religion. You don’t have the authority. Unless and until you understand
Dharma (religion in reality), you don’t have any authority over it. It is like anybody coming to India with a flag-post in the ground
and claims it as mine. An Indian’s identity is through his dharmic (righteous) deeds. Once an English officer said to me, “what is
an Indian’s identity? They think they are very great, what’s their identity?” So I said, “It’s very simple to recognize an Indian person
and an English person, I can show you”. So he said, “how do you know?” I said, “an Indian if you put a garland on him, he will
immediately remove it in a minute. But if an Englishman is garlanded, he will keep it on himself roaming around the whole day,
even if you call him for dinner that night he will come to you with a garland on him. That is the identity of an Indian.” I said.
Similarly, a dharmic (righteous) person's identity is. Outwardly you might see a person a bad one, but a dharmic is standing on
righteousness innately, inwardly. Not outwardly. The one who is innately, inwardly dharmic is a different make. And the sly one,
talks lies, is a fraud and cunning, and never be dharmic. And that’s why our dharma (religions), the dharma of the whole world is
distorted. Nobody would believe now that Hindu dharma, was taken to such an epitome by saints like Adi Shankaracharya, who
was highly realized, where it has been now degraded. Where is Mohammad Sahab and what is his religion (Islam) now. Where
Jesus Christ and what his religion is now (Christianity). I can’t see how people are walking blindly in the wrong directions.
The kundalini, who is our mother, sitting in the Mooladhara, Shri Ganesha protects her. Sitting over there (in Mooladhara). But he
is an innocent child. A child who is protecting. But when aggressive people attack her then the mother inside manifests her
anger than all the negative problems against her manifest in you.
As I mentioned, that Shri Vishnu is established in the Nabhi, and the Swadishthana was made to manifest the creation. Like the
uterus of the woman is controlled by the aortic plexus, which is established through the Swadishthana chakra. Whatever we
create it is from Swadishthana chakra. Which is the sixth number as I showed? For example, any famous writer, or a famous
saint, whatever original creativity human beings create, he creates by praying to Shri Saraswati. Saraswati is the prime authority
of this (Swadishthana chakra). That’s why after Shri Ganesha we do Saraswati’s worship. And all these pujas and things we do
there is so much subtle deep meaning is what I have come to prove. Those who say this is falsehood is a very great thing, have
very deep subtle meaning, haven’t understood the depth of this and those who talk big about science, I want to show the
meaning of these subtleties. Even science has originated from these.
Without Shri Saraswati, Einstein would have not known the theory of relativity. Even Einstein said at the beginning of his book, “I
was troubled and tired working in the laboratory, with reading books for the invention, and so went out in the garden playing soap
bubbles.” In that, he said, “when sometimes from the unknown the theory of relativity dawned upon me.” The signal is towards
the same, that the whole universe is created within us. Whatever superficial, it has to go.
After that, I said the fifth chakra, the Nabhi chakra, Shri Vishnu was established (created). And his consort is Shri Lakshmiji.
Similarly, Shri Saraswati is also created thoughtfully. We think of Shri Saraswati like any other. In this, the thoughtfulness is very
subtle. The seers haven’t created them. The Divine God created them. That is why His creation is very thoughtful. You keep that
ShriSaraswati’s image in you and worship her. She is adorned in white robes (saree). The color white is abstract. A lot of people
ask,” Mother why do you wear white?” I am a married woman. I generally don’t wear white. But during meditation (during
realization), I don’t want the human attention-getting entangled in colors. That’s why Shri Saraswati is created and has been
given a Veena (stringed musical instrument), which is incredible. Veena in India is traditionally a primordial musical instrument,
meaning the human being who is educated and knowledgeable, must know music the same as the worshipper off Shri

Saraswati.
You must notice that educated intellectuals can be very dry, and a headache in pujas (worshipping). They don’t have any taste or
aura. If you converse with them you’d get bored. Once I met someone. He poured all his scholarship on me. People run away
from these so-called intellectuals. A person who is like that would never be a worshipper (follower) of Shri Saraswati. Been an
educated intellectual and a follower of Shri Saraswati are completely separate. Every educated intellectual should know music
and art. Specializing in only one thing doesn’t make someone intellectual. Then how one would be a worshipper of Shri
Saraswati? Now I don’t understand one thing, that is the economics of human laws, one which is beyond my comprehension,
maybe because it is all so extremely artificial. Maybe that’s why I don’t understand it. A person should excel in art when the
Swadishthana chakra is in fulfillment.
Then on Nabhi chakra Shri Lakshmi is seated. Now if you see, Shri Lakshmi is also very beautifully created. In her two hands,
there are lotuses. One hand is raised in blessing and one is down in giving. Now those who are feeling vibrations will understand
it, what it means. The meaning of lotuses in her hand, the two hands, one is for self-respect and one is for grace. A miserly
person can never be regal or royal. A miserly person should never be called royal. He is miserly as well as rich. The one whose
household has grace, one who respects and values art, one who propagates art, only he is a royal person. And like the lotus
which has coziness, comfort giving, like when a bee enters and settles on it, it takes the bee in. A person like that should be
called Kamalapati (Shri Vishnu). But every man here thinks that he is a Lakshmipati (Lakshmi’s husband). To become Lakshmi’s
husband, one should become a protector and provider like Shri Vishnu, the one who like a father cares and looks after the whole
world as his own family. I have seen a few rich people, who can’t even look after their relatives. The one who doesn’t care for
other's needs, how would he be Lakshmipati? The one who cares looks after the whole world, he is the worshipper of Shri
Lakshmi. This is what we call an enlightened industrialist. If we get people like that then all the problems of the country will be
solved.
The positions of Lakshmiji’s both hands has got a deep meaning. The hand downward means a rich person should always be
giving (charitable). To donate unobstructed. It should be spontaneous. There should not be any emotions in donating, that I am
donating. And the hand upwards means to give protection. When someone comes running under one's protection saying,
“Brother I am in trouble, please help me someway.” Instead, the doors will be closed. To get rid of the troubled person we send
five bodyguards. I don’t call such a person a Lakshmipati (regal person). Then people say, “ones you start giving, then there won’t
be any end to it. No end to people who will ask all the time. That’s not the thing. The one who comes to you for help and is denied
is the wrong thing. But you people probably don’t know this, that even a small giving, manifests in a big way. It becomes very
huge. In my limited life, my husband’s salary is not huge, which means he is not extremely rich, but I have noticed, whenever I
have helped, even a little help, had manifested in thousand folds. It had showered on my family. It had showered on my people
and also the world. One giving or charity never goes waste.
I will give you an example. We were in Delhi and once a refugee came to me (during the partition of India and Pakistan) and said,
“Mother I will be delivering (baby) tomorrow, you have such a big house, we don’t have anywhere to stay, can you please let us
stay.” I said come in and stay. My husband came and got worried. Said to me, “You are so innocent, letting anybody stay in our
house. What if we have troubles with this.” I said, “If it comes, then let it be. If our child comes to our house then there are
chances that the troubles might come as well. No big thing about it.” So he said, “I don’t understand your logic. I (Shri Mataji)
said,” Ok, never mind, the outside room is vacant and I kept them there, where is the problem? He said, “you have no idea who
you have kept in there.” His point was on logic and mine illogical. But you will understand my logic later on. The refugees stayed
in the house. The couple also had a Muslim person with them and the couple Hindus. The Muslim was their friend. So I let them
all stay. So in Delhi, the people (who were rioting) said to me (Shri Mataji), “You have kept a Muslim in your house, we know that
as the servants have mentioned us. I lied to them completely. I said, “You believe in them, have you seen my KumKum (red dot
on the forehead). No Muslim is staying here.” They got scared and left. Now, these days that Muslim person, is a well-known
poet, India’s famous poet. And is alive today. He reveres me very much. He has mentioned it even in his poetry. But during the
riots, I did not know him, when he stayed at our place. Such a great poet, if I had not given him refuge, he would have been dead
by now and all his great poems wasted. The woman who stayed back then is a big actress, very famous. After that incident, we
never met. She kept searching for me after. But I was on the move, with my husband’s job. Then after a while, once I came to

Mumbai, so some of the young boys and girls decided to make a movie. They said to me to ask the actress to act in the movie
we were doing. I said, “I won’t ask her.” They asked,” Why”? I said, “There are some limitations. Leave it.” When there was the
launching ceremony, she (the actress) came. Seeing me she started crying. She said, “Mother, why didn’t you mentioned to me
that the movie is yours!” I said that’s why I didn’t mention, because you knowing that it was my movie, would jump into doing it
(without asking the price). Like this, I can give lots of examples, that whatever charity you do never goes waste. That is which is
always held on tightly will always go waste. If tomorrow you have demonization then you will be all done by. Any mishap that
happens, then that will be it of you. Give with both the hands. Don’t be scared. Give it with one hand, and you will receive it with
another.
The establishment of Lakshmiji on our Nabhi is for this very reason. Whatever we eat, we consume, the food in our stomach, its
digestion is the activity managed by Shri Vishnu. You would be surprised that I always suggest donating to people who have
diabetes. A charity that is done by human beings always returns in a thousandfold blessing. That is all the ailments of our
abdomen, the cure is Shri Vishnu. To imbibe Shri Vishnu in us means we have within us the charitable quality. The person who is
growing in charity will never have stomach problems or complaints. It is somewhat like that, which might look or seem strange
to you, but it is true. You try and do it. Anybody who has stomach problems, go and donate something to someone. Anybody who
has a bloated stomach will feel relief in it. This is scientific because I have tried it. Makes a lot of difference.
After this on the heart chakra, as I mentioned before, that Shivji is the Divine Lord (Ishwara). Shivji’s presence within us is very
necessary. Because he is the witness. (Shretragnya) Witnessing the whole creation is who He is. He knows everything, He is the
witness. Within us, there is somebody is what we feel, who knows us inside. If we speak lies, speak the truth, speak good, give
charity, if we are great or small. Knowing everyone inside us is seated in our heart in a witness state. He is the Divine God, who is
the pure self within (Atmaswaroop), is seated in our hearts.
But before reaching the heart chakra, the gap I showed you, is all the ocean of illusion (Bhavsagara). In the center is the seat of
Shri Vishnu and on it, Shri Brahmadeva creates the whole universe. He made this ocean of illusion. After creating the ocean of
illusion, the question was how to cross it over? The human being was created, but how to make him realize it (Self realize)? How
to make human beings recognize it? In him how to activate the Divine essence (Brahmatatwa). Meaning how to get the union of
Shiva and Shakti within him? How would the connection (yoga) be established? For this, a special personality was created in this
world. This was created by the combined essence (powers) of Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesh, who we acknowledge as Shri
Dattatreya. Shri Dattatreya is none other than Adiguru (Primordial Master). He is my guru. He has mentored me all his past lives.
If you hear about his birth and all his previous lives you would be amazed. We have forgotten such a great thing. Shri Duttatraya’s
incarnations are numerous. Firstly he came as King Janaka. Shri Sitaji was his daughter, who was the embodiment of Shakti
herself. Then he came as Machindranath, Zorashtra, and Mohammad Sahab, who were a completely different type of human
being. They trialed out lots of different things. Shri Dutta, the primordial masters firstly in this world educated (guided) us about
the symbolic forms within us. And then also said that you people (humans) got entangled in symbolism, in idol worshipping.
Their meaning was to go beyond and recognize the power (Shakti) within these idols. That’s why they talked about the idols. For
example, there is a flower, and to describe the honey within the flower, they talked about the flower first. From which the people
would taste the honey. But people got stuck to flower. So then they took incarnations and talked about the honey. In that, they
talked about God in the abstract. They deliberately didn’t talk about the reincarnation of life. Because as soon as you talk about
past lives, people ask me, “Mataji, tell me about my past lives.” The life that has passed, why do you want to know that? Whether
you were a king or a pauper, what difference it will make? That’s why they (Primordial Masters) did not discuss past lives.
Mohammad Sahab was the same, Duttatraya’s incarnation, and the same incarnation was King Janaka. The same incarnation
was Nakaka, whose sister Nanaki, was the same Adishakti (Primordial energy). She was Sitaji. Now, what can I say, you would be
surprised, that the Shia sect that started after Mohammad Sahab, his daughter was Fatima, she was also Adishakti, and her two
children were, Hassan and Hussain, back then when they saw even after the annihilation of the world, the human beings did not
understand, then they were born as Buddha and Mahavira and they brought the non-violence as religion, and attempted that
maybe with the establishment of non-violence people will achieve self-realization. But couldn’t do it. Now you are fighting
amongst each other. I always say if a Muslim gets obstructed from getting his realization, you take the name of Dattatreya. And
if Hindu gets obstructed, I say you take Mohammad Sahab’s name. You don’t know that those who project themselves as great

Hindus, were Muslims in their previous lives.
When I went to Iran, I saw that there people meditating, ringing bells and applying tilak (red dot on the forehead) and doing aarti
(flame of candle used as a worshipping act to the Divine). Because anybody on one extreme can go to other extremes, like a
pendulum. Be in the middle, nor Hindu nor Muslim. Everything is in our void (stomach). Now you must see that you put your
hands up in meditation. This morning lots of people put their hand up, now you all also do it, will benefit you. This is Namaz. But
does the Muslim knows what this thing is? Do Hindus know what this is? And putting the hands on top of the head in the
Christians, you know when they baptize, they put water on the Sahasrara (chakra).
Then Shivji who is in our hearts, to know Him, is a very difficult task. He is extremely innocent, meaning he is only in witness
state. He only watches, is a supervisor. He witnesses the Shakti’s play. But when the kundalini rises and passes over the Heart
Chakra, not in the heart. I have heard that some great writers, said the heart is here. The heart is placed here, but the Heart
chakra is in the center, where only Sushumna is present. There is a reason, that the Shakti (inner energy) is always separate until
she reaches upwards in the brain, which is called the limbic area, does not reach there, till this energy (kundalini), singularly,
reaches up in the limbic area, and then showers her flow on both the sides (two channels), then in the heart (left side) union is
achieved. And then lower in the Nabhi they unite creating the Brahmatatwa (Divine essence), again rising in the Agnya chakra,
which is crossed over, opens up (in Sahasrara).
Whatever has been said about Shivji’s consort is absolutely the truth. You have read Devi Mahatmya. Not one word is wrong in it.
Markandeya Swami was a great seer. Not a word by him is untrue. Not a word is distorted. I am sometimes surprised, how far
did humans have seen these things so minutely. You all say this is Maya (illusion), and even with so much Maya, you have
recognized it. This is also a human's great feat. But have anyone heard Markandeya Swami’s name? He in Saptasadi described
Shri Durga. This is true. Because in the ocean of illusion when people were seeking, to help them, that Shakti (Divine energy) had
to come in a lot of different forms. So then the Shakti came on this earth, all by Herself. She back then in a lot of forms
annihilated, killed all the rakshasas (demons) who were harassing Her bhaktas (devotees). But no use of it. They were
(rakshasas) annihilated, but now they are born again and have spread around in this Kaliyuga (modern/dark age). They have
come back. But back then the devotees had to be protected. Back then no question of giving realization. There the situation was
of protecting the humans. That’s when they (rakshasas) were annihilated. That is the Devi, who we know her by the name of
Adishakti, Bhagawati. She as Shivji’s consort, back then, killed all these rakshasas.
After that Agnya chakra, when we come Agnya chakra, you would be surprised that we suddenly arrived in a very modern era.
Before Mohammad Sahab, a few days earlier, Jesus Christ was born. Jesus Christ was himself the life force (Pranava)of the
universe. Verily life force. You know about Shri Ganesha, who is the same Jesus Christ! The cross I showed you, the same cross,
which is Shri Ganesha, who you must have seen as been shown as Swastika. The Swastika is Cross. That Shri Ganesha is the
form of life force (Pranava) when in human form incarnated in this world is Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ extracted out the evil or
negative forces, and no one else did. He annihilated all of them. All of them says so, that he killed them. I am talking about Jesus
Christ first because on Vishuddhi chakra is Shri Krishna. But Jesus Christ’s mother was Radha herself. That’s why I am
discussing his form first. This is on the Agnya chakra on number two. Shri Krishna and his wife Radha. ‘Ra’ means energy, ‘Dha’
means the one sustains it. Radha works on Vishuddhi chakra. Now over here, if you ask the doctors, are sixteen sub plexuses on
the cervical plexus, have her sixteen attributes (powers). They are complete. But even being complete he (Shri Krishna) could not
finish the work he came for because all his life finished fighting the evil people. He came at a very evil era and got all wasted.
Although the description of Leela (Shri Krishna’s playful activities) is all Sahaj. This is Sahajyoga. You would be surprised him
(Shri Krishna) breaking the earthen pots, tying the people around in a group, breaking Radhaji’s earthen pots, was all Sahaja
yoga. Because she uses to carry the vibrated water from the river Yamuna, that water would get spilled on the lanes and the road
was the reason he would her pot. You think Radha didn’t know about that, of course, she fully knew it. But back then you could
not get the people together in a hall like today and say,” You people go into meditation”. Then people would have said,” Have you
gone insane. We are householders, how could we get into meditation?” In reality, Sahaja yoga would only work for those who
have a family and are householders.
That’s why Shri Krishna experimented with Sahaja yoga with simple Gopa-Gopikas (his village friends form Gokul). Chose simple

people living simple lives. You don’t know that those who think are great religious mendicants and ascetics have become
someone religious, from them no one would get emancipated. Nobody would get there salvation. Yes, it might be, that a great
yogi, or an ascetic if he wants to reduce someone to ashes with a glance (by yogic powers). You must have read Bhagirathi’s
trials. In that, it has been mentioned that the poor fellow Bhagirathi’s forefathers were reduced to ashes. Is this anything great,
that one reduces anyone to ashes? This pativrata (women who faithful and devoted to their husbands) people, which are Savitri’s
power, those who talk about Savitri, Gayatri, be aware that those people will never be peaceful, happy, and compassionate from
within inside. Yes, they might be luminous and powerful. Because as I showed, the moon channel is been overpowered by them.
Having that power what would one achieve? Today burn someone, then next they will burn you. All the sadhus (ascetics), and
those who think they are great and have achieved a certain power, don’t understand that they have not achieved the essence of
love, albeit achieving all other powers.
And like all these ascetics, God save those from such people, who have imbibed themselves with Savitri’s powers (Right side
channel), what work of emancipation they have done? They destroyed even my Krishna with the curse (Shri Mataji is referring to
Gandhari from Mahabharata). What’s the use of such extremism that one could not recognize him (Shri Krishna). Very selfish of
them. There is nothing in it that is compassionate for the whole community or the world. You think of it! That’s why all those who
work on Ida Nadi (left channel) and all those who work on the Pingala Nadi (right channel) are all the same. Meaning those who
follow abstinence, ascetics means, all those people, and those who say eat this and eat that, drink alcohol, eat and drink, are all
just the same (in extremes). One side (left side) brings in the realm of dead souls/entities (Bhootyoni) and the other (right side)
brings in the luminous/vigorous realm. From both the country, this world would not be devoid of any calamity, neither it will
achieve the compassionate state nor any emancipation within us.
The redeemer was necessary, that’s why Christ was established here (Agnya) who was Radha’s son. You would be surprised that
Mary herself was Radha. There is a reason for this, a great reason. Sitaji was Shri Rama’s wife. Was married. The injustice that
was done to her by the society, made her leave the house, by accusing her falsely, disgraced her. Why back then these great
people had a blindfold on? Why didn’t they said, that she is our mother? You are asking her to leave the house? She already had
passed the test, bypassing the fire. Why were they dumbfounded then? What happened to their vigor back then? All were
so-called very great then. Nobody raised any point on that. To teach them a lesson Radhaji did not marry Krishna under the
societal norms. But still, the whole world knows Shri Krishna as RadhaKrishna. But for him (Shri Krishna) the formal marriage is
important, that’s why there was no child. But in the next life, she (Radha) came as Mary and her child (Christ) glorified her, who
was a virgin. A not difficult thing to have a child as a virgin. If you are a realized soul then you are that state, as these days I give
birth to thousands from my Sahasrara. Not a difficult thing. But she (Mary) did it. Not difficult if someone wants to birth a child
from her womb. She did it without any difficulty. Even though in the world’s eyes, in society's norm it is not ok, but now the world
recognizes Mary as a great woman. People call her Divine Mother. This is her child’s (Jesus Christ) doing. Such a child who was
Divinity personified was not spared. They crucified him. At the age of 34 years, all of them killed him. This society calling
themselves, Hindus, Muslims, etc. the so-called contractors of religions killed him. Nobody thought that such a great soul is
departing the world. At such a young age he had to leave this world. Now we have made a big religion under his name. What’s
the meaning of this?
No proper construct of religion happened. What he (Christ) is and what religion they made up from him? He stressed one thing,
that is the destructive forces, which are negative forces, which he called Satan, called possessions, also spirits (dead souls), to
get rid of them. And today the whole Christianity works on spirits (possessions, negative forces). It is shameful that for those
things he always denied, we follow the same things again and again. Like Mohammad Sahab constantly said, “at least don’t
drink alcohol.” But the Muslims drink so much, and the amount of poetry they have created in the name of drinking and wine, you
won’t find anywhere in the world. Meaning is I say on behalf of Mohammad Sahab, Is this the religion of Muslims? On behalf of
Issah Masiha (Jesus Christ), “ Is this Christian religion? And on behalf of Adi Shankaracharya, I ask, “ Is this Hindu religion?”
Which are based on myths and the one who said the whole world is a big myth, Shri Adi Shankaracharya, has been falsified by
these people. He (Jesus Christ) is residing in this Agnya chakra. Here the people who misuse the Agnya chakra, and the person
who is mad on this chakra, the ones who have psychosomatic troubles, those people are said to have psychological trouble. We
also have a psychologist, who is a great person. He is also working on this. He also says taking the name of Issah Masiha (Jesus
Christ), the bhoots run away. We can rid of anyone’s negativity. But we people recite anyone’s name anywhere we want. At least

we must know the place (of the Divine incarnations on chakras). We should know the reason. It’s application be known. I want to
tell you all about it. But it all depends on your understanding and acceptance.
After Agnya chakra is Sahasrara, we have thousand, nine hundred and eighty-two nerves are what the doctors say. They don’t
say a thousand. I have seen them. How does it look? Let’s understand it. Like a very big lotus. Like in the bible it is said tongues
of flames as if the flames of fire entwined with itself. Like a big fiery flame, a large one, like a lotus. Entwined in lots of flames of
fire, is how it looks. And in the middle of it is the Brahmarandra (cosmic small opening on top of the head) in the Sahasrara,
which is pierced. When realization happens the crossing over of kundalini happens in a human being.
A lot of time has passed now and the topic today was different. Was somewhat new. Today or tomorrow, I will talk about how in
Sahaja yoga we can pierce it (Sahasrara) and what it means. Come to meditation tomorrow. Whatever I said is all a waste unless
and until you experience it. You will only understand after the experience. But there is no other choice without telling you all
about it. That is why I explained, and you all take it that it is all done and over with the explanation. Tomorrow is meditation time.
You all come during that time. Today evening we could not meditate. Tomorrow morning we will work hard till late, by which you
all get self-realized. And we will have a lecture as well as meditation. We have to give some time for God Almighty. Just a little
bit. I don’t want a lot. To know yourself within, need a little time and it will suffice. Today lots got realized. I am very happy that a
lot of you got a realization. And hope so tomorrow lots more will get realization. And you recognize it. The thing I am talking
about for which the whole universe was created, the whole creation is standing at the end of an epitome, of that universe’s
responsibility lies upon you. Nothing needs to be done as such. Nothing has to be brought and be given. If you all could take
something from me, I would be very thankful to you.

1973-1209, Seminar on Shri Dattatreya Jayanti, Day 3
View online.
9 December 1973
Seminar On Shri Dattatreya Jayanti, Day 3
Public Program
Birla Kreeda Kendra, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Seminar on Shri Dattatreya Jayanti, Day 3, (Hindi), Mumbai, December 9th, 1973
Today is Shri Datta Jayanti centenary. Today, it’s a very great day. I think this day has come only because of His blessings that
Sahaja Yoga has been blossomed in you people. I bow to the Guru of all the Gurus – Adi Guru, Shri Datta Maharaja. He is my
Guru also. He has taught Me quite a lot on Sahaja Yoga all through my many births. And because of that only, I have been able to
do some work in this birth also, and I am continuing to do.
"Guru Brahma Guru Vishnu Guru devo Maheshwara, Guru sakshat Parabrahma tasmai Guru dev namaha." The Guru is Brahma
[the Creator], Vishnu [the Sustainer] and Mahesh [the Destroyer] and the Guru who is Himself God, I offer my obeisance to him.
After creating the entire universe, like how a King spread out his kingdom and comes to see the world thereafter in a disguise, in
the same way Adi Shakti has also incarnated on this earth many a times. But no matter how supreme is Adi Shakti, she still
needs a human Guru. The place of man is still superior to that power. If Shakti has to take form of a human being, then she is
required to come on this earth only after having completed her father sometimes, her brother sometimes and her son
sometimes. First of all, try to understand that entire universe was created by Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesha.
At that time, a thought came in Adi Shakti’s mind to lift people out of the world, who were stuck in it, and that if these three
principles [Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva] were to be combined together somehow and the childlikeness and innocence of Shri Ganesha
could be absorbed by it, then it is possible to form a Guru from them who has to do a great task. Adi Shakti incarnated in the
form of Sati Anusuya. This is the only such a Sati [a chaste, faithful wife] in the whole world who has thought of emancipation of
the human beings. This is a very great thing. These three children came to Anusuya. The meaning of the name Anusuya is: "The
one who is without envy; she does not envy anyone, who is the universal love". In such a person, there is no place for
insignificant, petty thoughts such as jealousy, anger etc. The one who does not have any asuya [jealousy] she is Anusuya.
It is said that these three went to her door to examine her. And that moment she used her tejbal [powerful radiance]. What was
this tejbal? This was the love of mother, very much divine, love of a powerful mother. This tejbal fell on them and they became
small children.
Their complete unified form is Shri Datta Maharaj. He is a strange majesty; whatsoever description is made of him but will fall
short. And even if this is made to be explained, it will be beyond explanation. This is Shri Datta Maharaj who is full of triguna
[three attributes]. He came in the world in form of Adi Guru many times to teach how to cross the Bhavasagara [Void]. Yesterday,
I have told you that we fight in the world by forming many religions. The same Shri Datta incarnated many a times on the earth.
As I told you yesterday, King Janaka was one of them. King Janaka was the father of Janaki [Sitaji]. He was none other than the
incarnation of Shri Dattatreya. Thereafter, Machindranath, most have you must have heard his name, was also one of his
incarnation. After that, Zoroaster, who came three times on the earth, was also one of his incarnation.
After that, Mohammad Sahib, who was his incarnation, when he was asked that, "Bhai [brother] there must have been others also
before you?" then he replied, "Yes, there a Mohammad." Then again, he was asked who was before him. He replied, "There was
one Mohammad." 'Mohammad' means 'Praised': the one who is praised, the one who deserves to be praised and is the one who

is redeemer of the world. They were all Mohammads, they were all Dattatreyas, who came on earth regularly.
After that Nanaka, Guru Nanaka. If you ever read his teachings, if you read his talks then you will be surprised that he has always
talked in a Sahaja. He has said, “Sahaja Samadhi lago.” He has said, “Kahe re ban khojan jayi, sada niwasi sada alepa tohe sang
samai, pushpa madhya jo was basat hai mukur mahi jas chhayee, taise hi hari base nirantar ghat hi khojo bhai” – “Why to go to
the forest to find Him? He is always there with you, just like there is a fragrance in a flower and just as the reflection is there in a
mirror. In the same way, God is residing in you eternally. Seek Him within. He is just inside, achieve him just inside. We are just
singing poems, singing songs, we are just cramming his prescription.”
The talk of seeking this absolute principle, residing just inside the heart, has been made since ancient times by these Adi Gurus,
who are incarnated on this earth again and again. After the birth of the daughter of Mohammad Sahib, Fatima, as I said
yesterday also, there was the beginning of the caste “Shia” in Islam. 'Shia' word has been derived from 'Sia'. The word which
comes from 'Sia' became 'Shia' – 'Sia' means 'Sitaji'. If you go to UP [Uttar Pradesh, India] then nobody says 'Sitaji', they say 'Siaji',
“Siavar Ramchandra Ki Jai.” Everyone takes the name of Sia. She was Sitaji, the Adi Shakti herself. And her two sons, who were
Hassan and Hussain, destroyed many evils. When they ultimately died after getting tried, then in the next birth they thought of
establishment of non-violence, because violence led them nowhere. They were born as Mahavira and Buddha to make a new
experiment. Experiments do happen.
After Nanak Sahib, around 50-60 years ago in our Maharashtra, Dattatreya incarnated as Saibaba of Shirdi. If you want proof of it,
then you get your Realization and after that, if you put your hand on anyone, then you will get vibration of same kind. From just
vibration only you can know about all. As you must have eyes to see any shape, its colour, in the same way you are required to
feel vibrations so that you may know all the gurus of the world and will be able to know as who is a true Guru and who is a liar,
who is equal to that incarnation of Adi Guru Dattatreya. For mere saying, there are thousands of gurus in modern times. No one
becomes a guru just by talking about another guru. And by believing in a guru also, one does not become a guru. The meaning of
the word ‘guru’ is very large. This must be understood.
Today I want to talk on this issue: who is a guru and who is not. The obvious meaning of ‘guru’ means the one who is bigger than
us, the one who is sitting at a place higher than us. As the water collected at a height, spontaneously flows down, it is also eager
to find a surface for itself, and to bring everyone to its surface. You keep water to a certain height; it will be willing to [inaudible]
everyone. This is the very meaning of ‘guru’. The one who is not that kind is not a guru. He is above us in every matter, not just in
one matter. That is why we, people, who are wandering in street to street believing in guru should remember that the number of
gurus is in thousands.
The guru who talks of the absolute principle is a real guru. Those who talk of God and of God and who uplift you are real gurus.
Those who make money from you are not gurus. Those who charge money for their speech, they can never be gurus. Because
the speech which has come from God is a precious thing, the value of which you just cannot give. The day when you give value
of it then that thing cannot be of God. You cannot go and purchase God from market. Remember, today we are confronting
thousands of such people who are making money in the name of God. Nothing can be a bigger injustice and meanness than this.
If there is any dust, substance or a thing in this world which is equal to the kick of the feet of the God, then we can say that we
are watching God. You see, just now there was someone who came to our house, making himself to be greatest guru, started
telling Me that, "Shri Mataji, you have all kind of things in your house, and you are working like a normal housewife, then how can
you talk of God? I have given up this, I have given up that."
I told him that, "If you genuinely know what is renouncing, then you should also know that, from all these things, whatever you
think is equal to dust of feet of my Lord, is even equal to the particles, then you pick up that thing, but weigh equally." He started
watching here and there, saw this, saw that. After that, he became embarrassed. I asked him, "Did you discover anything?" "No,
no. Nothing was found equal to what was asked for." Then, I said, "Son, what actually have you given up? What have you given
up? Whose flag you are flowing from morning to evening, wearing saffron clothes and getting head bald, you are roaming in the
whole world, crying? What have you given up? Only, these stones, this soil?"

In reality Sahaja Yoga is getting nurtured in normal people who are leading a household life. Sahaja Yoga can never nurture in
those who dig their flags. Those people who live with simple spontaneous emotions, who live in majesty given by God, in his
happiness and joy, live with love, only such people of middle path reach to God. You should know what is the meaning of guru.
Now, those who collect money wearing saffron clothes, they can never be gurus. Those who had once broken bicycles are now
moving in Impala (car) can never be gurus. The one who has found God, if he wishes, he can sleep on the ground and if he
wishes he can sleep in a palace comfortably.
For this reason, I will give the example of King Janaka. Once, a very great arch called Nachiketa went to see the King Janaka. He
was first suspicious and eager. He asked his guru, "Why do you pay visit to him since he is a householder and also a king? And
then why do you bow down before him and touch his feet? He is just a householder!" Then he replied, "All right, you should go to
the place of King Janaka and stay there. You know that he is called as a videhi [beyond body], he was a dehati [a country
person]." When Nachiketa lived with him then he saw that there was so much wealth, people were eating and living comfortably.
The King enjoyed all type of meals; he roams and has children. How it is possible that such a man, should know God? The next
day he said to the king, "I am leaving just now, I’m just leaving now. I do not have to live here." Then the king said, "All right, let’s
go for a bath first." They went to bath in a river. He took him to Sharayu River for bath. While bathing in the river, suddenly
somebody informed the king that, "O Lord, your palace is on fire." King Janaka said, "Let it be, just now I’m in meditation." He
replied with a smile. This poor Nachiketa got little worried. After a while someone came to say, "All of your family members have
to run away and fire is fast approaching you." Then he said, "To hell with it, now I’m in meditation." Afterwards, they told him, "Fire
has reached up to here and all your ornaments and clothes will get burnt." Then all the bodyguards also ran away. This
Nachiketa, whose one or two clothes were lying outside, he thought that if these too were burnt then what will happen him? So,
he also ran away. He picked up all his clothes. Even then, Janaka was in meditation.
When he came back, Nachiketa was very much surprised. He asked, "King, didn’t you worry that your clothes would be burnt?"
Then Janaka replied, "What is myth will perish, there is no need to save it. Till it is there, keep it there, or if it is not there, then
leave it."
This is a true fact. Those gurus who do not consider myth as myth, then what are you going to find in them?
There is one occurrence in my in-law's family. Once there came a Barat [wedding procession] to our house. There was a demand
of Dahi-Wada [a fried dish dipped in sweetened curd] from them. The Baratis usually have some coquetry and during the days of
winter people told them, "Look in these days of winter it is very difficult to curdle because during winter evening curdling of milk
is not done." But they were adamant on having Dahi Wada - get it just now. In those times, a baba [a wanderer] used to live there.
He was called for and was requested to arrange dish somehow. He replied that he would do it but then would not live here
anymore. It was agreed and then he closed one window then another. After some time, he said, "Look here it is your Dahi Wada,
now enjoy it." People began to eat Dahi Wadas, they were all happy. But this babaji ran away. He ran to save his life during the
night. People could not understand why babaji had to run away. The next morning, people from low caste came to take the
remaining of the food. They came and when they saw all the utensils, they began saying that, "Who brought our pots here; these
are our pots, who carried them here?"
The marriage was accomplished somehow that is why the girl went to her in-law's house otherwise nobody could have sent her
there. The reason was that all the people had got annoyed. They started telling, "Who brought the pots here?"
Our ancestors and also those of my grandfather’s, did not believe in all these things. These were called Bhanamatis in
Maharashtra. Nobody used to believe in all these things before, that something came from above [heaven] and they ate all the
Dahi Wadas. You people should also think that, "Does he have only one business to serve you people Dahi Wadas?"
When you make anybody a big guru that he gives Rs.200 to you then I would say if such are the donors then why not solve the
economic problem? Give them all. They get you watches made in Switzerland. We will believe only if they get one made by God.

This must be considered that we want to get that supreme. But your seeking is also in these gross things, in these stones, money
and wealth, that is why you consider these people as gurus. Money is lost so is wealth. When all of your money is lost then you
come to Me.
Yesterday a woman came, you saw her, how she was dancing and jumping. I asked her, "Why have you come now?" She replied,
"What to do? I have become like this only!" I said, "All right, people make you fool and have I opened a mental hospital? You went
there to find what? Can God be achieved by dancing and jumping?"
All the rules and regulations for the human beings, those people who made these laws had no idea that how disgust human
beings can be. All those who have made these laws were very dignified and very auspicious people. They could just not
recognize the disgust and evilness of human beings and how much he is entangled in filthy jobs from within. If those people had
known that, then new laws would have been done to catch these people, all the people.
Jesus Christ was crucified by these people. That was easy. But nobody can catch these people who are plundering money from
you day and night and are bent on destroying you. And they are ready to send your kids to mental hospitals tomorrow. You
should at once try to take notice of it and think what is happening. To distribute gross material in the name of God is what kind of
generosity? Do you not ever think about it? In this Kali Yuga, I think the man has such a penetrative intelligence and has such a
wisdom. Does he sell all his wisdom that he just could not understand, that we are running like a mad after this kind of
mesmerism and enlightenment, and false assumptions and absolute myth within us, which make us believe that we are in
complete peace? We are cheating ourselves and others also.
When you are Realized then you do not have to go too far, do not have to read too much. You can understand that you are
Realized, there will be a sudden peace in you. I see that there are gurus of so many people and after reaching age of 30-40 years
of age, they die out of a heart attack. It is impossible for you to get even an accident; no question of heart attack, once a little bit
of Realization has awakened in you. There are many incidents like this with us. Just a day before yesterday they were telling that
there was a boy who was coming in a train and the train was completely over-turned, not a single person was injured in the
compartment in which the boy was present and they all crossed over it. Deities should wander above you. If divine cannot come
down to you then what is the use of this realization. Now you know our people, that how many are realized, even cancer was
treated; there is nothing special about it. The only thing is that these people are not interested in curing. They are just interested
in realization. Because the joy you have got, the same joy you want others to enjoy, spontaneously.
If you have money, wealth then you want to spend money to feed people. In the same way a Realized soul wishes to awaken
others and realize them and they can do it. If there is a light entered in you then there is a no need to swear in for that. If there is
fragrance of musk then there is no need for you to take a vow that there is fragrance of musk. But who is seeking musk? This
should be considered first, otherwise what is the use of wandering in such pursuits?
On one hand there are these people who are playing with our subconscious, with our gross awareness, with our past. I know
these kinds of people. In this seeking I have seen many guru ghantals [fraud gurus] and I know all their tricks that what kind of
condition they create and how they destroy your kundalini for generations. I know many such people who would tell you about
your previous lives and you are mesmerized by that.
Somebody just says that, "I’m your husband." A woman came to me and told me that, "Now I have given up all of me to him." I
asked her, "What! Why did you give in?" She replied, "He told me that, 'I’m your husband'." I asked, "Your husband! You are really a
big chaste woman! If you are such a chaste that you are so much blind about your dead husband then what about your living
husband? Do you have no chastity towards him? And the one who is a money cheater, to whom you have given all of your
jewellery because he told you that he is your husband!"
Somebody was telling that, "This fellow was telling us that, 'I am the incarnation of God, I am God almighty'." What is getting lost
in saying anything in this country? It does not cost anything. We are perfect in saying lie, whatever lie can be said. It is called
sigmoid personality in psychology. If you have read psychology then you can understand that psychologist have also found it

about these people. And if you think that they have not found then it is no true!
They are big thieves. They just stand up and start telling any nonsense and people start believing in them. This has been said in
the Bible that these kinds of people will come in the world, be careful. They claim that they are God. If they are God then there
must be some powers in them also.
There was a gentleman who was telling me. I asked him, "Why you have such an assemblage of so many women around you?
What are you doing inside the room while keeping the doors closed? What kind of such things are you doing in the name of
God?"
Because he has tortured a woman, she was telling me in private. I told her to go to the court and pray for the arrest of this man.
Then she said, "How we can talk in the court, there will be a plague on us, we have our respect, and we have family." Then I told
her, "If you would not tell it in the court then how can this man be exposed?"
Then I went to this gentleman, and asked him, "What are you doing? Why are you committing such a sin? What will you get out of
it in the name of God?" Then he told me, "You do not know that I’m Shri Krishna?" I said, "What a thing! Your face is that of a
bhoot and you are claiming to be Shri Krishna. How come you are Shri Krishna?" I asked him, "How much you about Shri Krishna?
The one who had destroyed the Kalia [serpent devil] in just 5 years of his age, charging on his head, where is he now?" I told him
in humour that, "If I just scratch your beard here you won’t be able to get up." After that I have heard that someone got caught of
his beard for half an hour and he was kept on shaking like this. I just said it in a light way.
Second gentleman started telling me that, "I make woman nude because Shri Krishna also used to do the same." Just tell me
what kind of nonsense is this? Shri Krishna was a child of five years old! It was his childlike activities. How can a five-year-old
child make women nude? He was very deep and used to do the activities of Sahaja Yoga. For a 5-year-old boy, who is elder and
who is younger? Could he understand all these things at that age? He was not even 5 years old, less than that. Then I asked him,
"If this was the case then while living in Dwarka why did he run on occasion of Draupadi chir haran [tearing of clothes] taking with
him Shankh, Chakra, Gada, Padam, and Garud? Why did he run? If he had no sense of chastity of a woman then why did he run?’
On this issue that "shri krishna" [referred person] became silent.
On one hand, there is Shri Krishna who is holding a mountain on one finger and on other hand these [fraud krishnas] are just
being formed in every street and market. Get them where you want, whether "shri Krishna" or "shivji". Where is The Lord Shiva?
Have you saved any amount of your intelligence or not? I’m surprised sometimes and very much surprised because man has
reached to such a level of penetrability in his intelligence! To whom God has opened all the shell of intelligence, then why there is
curtain on the issue of religion? Not only in this country but it is very sad to say that such darkness prevailing in foreign countries
also.
There was another yogiji; his disciple came to meet us. He came before me. What we saw that his Agnya and Nabhi Chakra both
were rotated [opposite]. And he was singing his bhajans. To rotate opposite means the person who is mad. When you are
realized then you will also see that when a man becomes mad then his Agnya and Nabhi Chakra get oppositely turned.
This ill practice of pret vidya [knowledge of possessing a bhoot] and shamshan vidya [cemetery knowledge] have been
continuously running since long in our country. This is not the case where nobody knows about it, but it is sure that in view of
modern education, attention could not go that side. It is also called as karani in Marathi.
These possessed women who are often called as "devi", can come in anyone’s body and we go to apply kumkum to them.
bhoots do enter them. Why we cannot understand it? These all are nothing but pret vidya [knowledge of possessing a bhoot] and
shamshan vidya [cemetery knowledge].
There is a big science of this field. I will tell you about it sometime later if you wish. But today I’m speaking at the feet of Datta

Maharaj.
This should be clearly understood that these are symptoms of great fall that we sell ourselves in the hands of others.
At least try to put your intelligence alright, just jerk it. Whenever you go listen a lecture, then you just think that, "What this person
is speaking about and what he is doing?" Try to distinguish between what he is saying and what he is doing. He just cannot be a
Guru. You should understand it!
If we say just now that we are this and that and tomorrow, we start getting after mundane things, then we cannot be like that. I
mean to say that this world is not a useless but a state of witness should at least come in Gurus.
There are many gurus who have appeared for Kundalini. You tell me about them. Yesterday also I told you that God has no watch
to tell you that, "At 4’0 clock I will raise your Kundalini." These are all arrangements of bhoots.
I will give you a very good example on this. There was a big doctor called Dr.Lane, who lived in London. He had done quite
research and he wanted that people get cured through him but suddenly he died in an accident therefore he could not take his
research to people.
So, when he died – when we die, we do not die in full way, a small portion is fallen, remaining subtle body leaves slowly –slowly.
So, he thought why not try what it is like entering in some body. So, there was a Vietnamese soldier who was fighting, he entered
in him and asked him to go to his son and tell him about such and such things. Now just think if Dr. Lane had to do it somehow
then why he did not enter into his son? Because he knew that there are consequences of doing this. So, he said, "Look, you
narrate the whole story to my son and he will agree to it." When this soldier went to meet his son then his son was convinced. He
said, "These things were known only to my father and no other person know about it and so let’s open a clinic."
They formed a very big organization through which they used to cure people. Other doctors also got associated with Dr. Lane.
They also do these kinds of things that are being done still now. They tell you that, "If you have any problem then write a letter to
us." They tell that at 5’o clock evening something will happen inside you, someone will come in you, in your psyche which we call
as superego. He will enter through it and work it out. They take out a bhoot and replace it with another. If there is a drunkard then
his drinking will go away but he will start getting angry. This is their work. But they are simple poor fellows because at least they
tell you that they do the work of spirit and they do not say that, "We do the work of God."
But in our country people just not do the work of solid bhoots but of devils and give the name of God to it. If such types of people
cure anybody to some extent, then you can imagine what will be his state whose Kundalini is damaged, where there is an injury
to our Mother. There is no need to go to any of these places. If not today, all of you become Realized tomorrow for sure but do
not go to wrong path. Once your Kundalini is damaged then I just cannot do anything. The whole job will be finished. Those
whose Kundalini has been wronged you know about them.
Amongst you many have got Realization, they know how much difficulties we have beard upon ourselves. While we put our hand
on them some of them got big, big blisters on them, very big blisters have come out. And when they put hands towards me then
they get small bit of blisters and many people feel burning sensation in their hands. From me there are cool, cool breezes flowing
out but their hands are burning. I’m willing to get them [realized people] established in their powers.
But there is different kind of power which sitting in them [false gurus]. Try to save yourself from these gurus because there is no
law to prevent it. If anyhow it has to be prevented then think from your intelligence that, "Who is a true guru? The one who give
you absolute." One woman asked me a question; it was a very on spot question. She asked me, "If you have seen any realized
souls in this world who are realized without coming to you."
There have been many and they are still now. That is why I took many of my disciples to a very great Guru, who used to live in
Kolhapur, in a forest mountain. It is Gagangarh, seven miles away. I took them there, "Today is an auspicious day, is a very great

occasion there." I asked them, "Just open your hands like this." Cool-cool vibrations were coming. "Mother, who is this person
here? Why he had gone to a forest?" This is also a question to think that all those great people why they live in jungles.
You have mentioned about Nityananda, he was a great person in reality. He was such a person that when anybody used to come
near him then he used to throw stones at him saying, "Get lost from here." The same can be said of Baba Tabbudin in our
Nagpur. He was a poor guy who lived in jungle, which is now a populated area. Why these people run away to jungles?
There are few reasons. You have just seen here, there were some children sitting, their hands were burning, and they were doing
something like this.
In the same way their body starts burning. Many poor sadhus just have to live in water, because in your psyche, in super ego,
bhoots are sitting to burn and to torture these bhaktas.
Therefore, they decide to run away to jungles. Because you don’t know what are you doing! You don’t understand vibrations that
is why these poor people are staying in jungles to save themselves. How could they redeem themselves?
Now just look at Gagangarh Maharaj, it is true that he cured many people, but the problem is that his fingers moved inside like a
telescope and those of feet also. The poor man lives on a tree or moves on a lion. Apart from this he cannot move anywhere. But
when I reached to him, these people were with me, he quickly recognized me. There is no doubt about it. He has not yet seen me
in this lifetime. But from many years he knew about me. He is elder to me. He began to say, "Mother, I have been waiting for you
for many years. Today I am so fortunate that you have come here." He is a natpanthi, so he is just like Macchindranath and a very
great person.
Once I went to Himalaya, there also I found a few; the same were in Haridwar; they live in many parts. I told them the blossom
time will come. I will tell you how to save your powers and how to return back the punch of these people. I am sitting, you at least
come, I will cure everybody, I can tackle them easily. Many of them [sadhus] have said, "Mother, we will come, we will come,
surely." But poor chaps don’t have courage. Their hands and legs have been broken; they [false gurus] have put blisters in them,
they have burnt them. All these are work of devils. Up till now I have counted ten demons and six demoness who have come in
this Kali Yuga. Nowadays, suppose Ravana comes here, then also he will never say that he is Ravana, he will claim himself to be
God. If he will claim to be Ravana then he will be put in prison. The identity of Ravana is also the one of a demon. That too, I am
going to tell you about, you will be benefited.
The man who has eyes like a cat- if you see the eyes of cat then you will understand. Many people just don’t see many things.
The eyes of cat - which has an eyeball inside - pupil of eye, as soon as you see it, it becomes small and in no time, it disappears, it
is just similar to the eyes of demons. I know them quite well. I have seen them in each and every birth. You can know them
through their eyes that they are demons. Their pupil of eye just become small and disappears. This is their identification.
Whether you can call them 'God' or anything else, but they are demons. And these people have achieved many siddhis [powers].
This is work of our Bhole Shankaraji [Shiva]. What to do? They [demons] have achieved many siddhis.
As Shiva gave one siddhi to Ravana that when he used to speak and give lectures then something used to happen on Nabhi
Chakra [of the listener] that a bhoot would sit there. Thousands of people were overwhelmed listening to his speeches. Even to
this extent that nobody was ready to fight against Rama (but) he convinced all of them. Similarly, Mahishasura had also siddhis.
All demons have their own siddhis. And because of their siddhis, these people always kept on suppressing goodness and light,
and kept on pouring darkness.
Today in Kali Yuga, the situation is quite similar, and you are thinking that, "I have only two hands." It is your work and it will
happen through you people only. You will be surprised because deities are also sitting at one side and demons on other. Fierce
battle is going on. Today when I see this scene- what are these troubles? Is this because of your thinking? No, not at all! Thess
devils and demons work through the pret yoni [dead spirits] and satiate you people so that you come running in their feet. All this
is the work of these people. And if you have to defeat these people, then you have to lit the light in you. If you want to enlighten it,

then all have to lit a light within themselves. You yourself will become a light.
And what is surprising is - at this time God also wants that man should come on the stage, man himself should work. A man
should become Parmatma Swaroop [form of God] and becomes a superman, there be establishment of superman. A new
dimension is going to come in you. But the only thing is that you should learn to take it, should learn to absorb it. It cannot be
compared with the standard of intelligence as of now, because if you try to understand through the intelligence, then you can
only see my hand but not un-manifested streams which are flowing from them.
Those people who are very big pandits, if they want, they should read Kabir Das, Nanakaji and if possible, also read
Shankaracharya, he is the best. If you read Adi Shankaracharya then you can understand what is this Chaitanya Lahari
[Vibrations], I am talking about. I have not yet met anyone who has systematically said or explained about Kundalini. You know
that little knowledge is a dangerous thing. The same can be said about Kundalini. Otherwise how they could have written this
kind of strange things? I do not know on what basis. But still the witness state of human being is so high, so high that if you read
the Devi Bhagawatam, the Saptashati of Markandeya Swami, then you will be surprised how deeply, in small detail they have
understood this thing.
The truth is that unless and until you are Realized anything you do is a waste. Krishna has said the same thing. Krishna has also
said the same thing that, "First get him within." But those who were supposed to understand it could not understand it, "He was
saying to get him inside and you are saying go outside to fight." He meant that you should be a witness. It is happening in
akarma [inaction] it is being done through you. You just do not do. Ego is finished and superego is finished. The one, who is a
doer, is abolished. It was this, what he was talking about, but he was not listened to. He was a diplomat. Krishna has his own
guru tattva. His guru tattva is also very interesting. He was a very big politician. I used to call him an absolute, pure politician. He
was such a big politician, and he knew that this is the only way to get these fools all right. When a child tries to drive a cart by
attaching his horses at back then his father comes and says, "Keep whipping it, carry on, you will reach." But after getting tired
when a child thinks that the horse is just not moving, then he comes to know that first put the horse in front of the cart then whip
it. Therefore, he said to do karma yoga [yoga of action].
Now here you should notice the diplomacy of Krishna. It is difficult to find a guru like Krishna. He is such a guru that requires a
lot of intensity and depth of intelligence. What I am going to tell you now, no one would have told you this so far, you listen to it.
He said that, "You do the action and leave the fruitfulness of action to God." It is just not possible, an absolute absurd condition.
When you are doing something and you know it, then how can you leave it to someone else? You are keeping horse at back and
whipping it.
Secondly, he said that, "You do bhakti [devotion]". See in it, it is very beautiful. You do the ananya bhakti [absolute devotion].
When there is no one else then how there can be devotion? Means that when union has taken place then whom to devote? He
said, "Pushpam, Falam, Toyam" – "Whatever fruits, flowers, water you offer I will accept it." But he has said that you should do
"Ananya bhakti [absolute devotion]" while giving it!
This is absurd, because on absurdity, the mind of man will be confused then he will come to terms. Perhaps he just did not think
that man is going to learn easily.
But I am a mother and if a mother has to say something, she will just say it. So far as possible she will tear her throat to say what
she has to say to her son. It is very different kind of heart of a mother, she could not tolerate diplomacy, it is too late, it is high
time, much has been lost, there is disturbance, there is a pile of suffering. Now it, the time has come to do this work and it is
being done. You people are also achieving this thing.
Those who have found it and those who have known it, there is a program tomorrow; they should come tomorrow for the
program. Those who have not yet achieved it, they should also come. We have also other places. We are trying to get
permanently Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan so that people can come there. There are many people here who are realized. You too can
give realization just after getting it. There are people who know about chakras and have become knowledgeable and there are

some who can give realization.
The glory of India is that it is a Yoga Bhoomi [land of Yoga, union]. Our country is the highest of all the countries of the world. The
vibrations of our country are the highest. There is no doubt about it. And our country is the spinal cord of the entire world. And
the place of Kundalini is also here. She can put the world alright one day.
But as of now, all our Chakras are caught up. The movement of Kundalini is getting difficult. If you can get rid of your blockages
in the chakras, then it is possible that from this country itself this message could be sent out so that the whole world can be
changed and it can stand to another, another path where there is a call for Satya Yuga, that Satya Yuga is going to come. This is
the coming of Satya Yuga. But now it is left on your freedom and authority whether you accept it or go for your destruction. As
diseases like cancer and things like war, all these can destroy our world. If you want you should take it with you and put the world
in light and if not, then darkness will arrive. If God wishes He can create thousands of conditions thinking that an experiment has
failed. Such he will think.
Now it is a last jump. It has to be seen that how many people dedicate themselves to it.
Many, many thanks to you. This 'three days seminar' was completed with lots of love. So many people accept this love! That is
why, being a mother, I thank you very much. Our many children have already worked hard, day and night, and they have worked
hard to redeem others, and they should keep doing this.
I bless you all for this purpose. I take my leave by giving you blessing of my love.

1973-1222, Public Program
View online.
22 December 1973
Public Program
Nagpur (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Public Program (Hindi), Nagpur, Maharastra, 1973
[English translation from Hindi]
Long time ago, there came many occasions spontaneously when I had to give lectures in front of very great audience, to say
before thousands of people and there was an incident in 1930 when Gandhiji did fast. My father was also a good orator, you
must be knowing about him, but he had to leave to home because of some important work. Everybody started telling that, ‘Salve
Sir, if you will not give the lecture then all the people will run. How things will work?’ He said, ‘Brother, I am simply going. Here is
my daughter and I am leaving her as a bailment, I am going and I will come back then I will give a speech.’ But it was very late
and he did not return. Everybody told that, ‘He has not yet come and has left his daughter as a bailment. Now what will happen?
Who will give speech? And there are the people from Chitnis Park; if they become angry then they will start pelting stones.’
There was a gentleman sitting there, he told, ‘Why not ask her to give a speech?’ I was asked, ‘Would you give a speech?’ I replied,
‘OK, I will give.’ That time I was just 7 years old. If there are some people of that period, they must be remembering that I gave a
speech for about 15-20 minutes and I narrated the story of marriage of dolls (gudda-guddi). Now I think after so many years, I
have come with new topic amongst my own people, my own brothers and sisters. Quite a bit of old memories are also coming.
From the childhood itself, the thing that I had known very well, to talk about that I never got a chance. The reason behind it was
that a person who is born on tenth floor, the one who knows about the things of tenth floor: what can he talk with those who
belongs to first floor? Even if he says anything then nobody will believe. From early childhood I used to talk about it with my
parents, especially with my father and used to discuss much about the religion but I saw that He too thought that these things
will not be understood by anyone. For example, Mr. Barin [name unsure], who is a local advocate, he used to teach me in my
childhood, he too knows Me very well and my brothers and sisters and many people from here with whom my father was
acquainted; I used to consider about all these people that they would not be able to understand my point. Therefore this was not
the proper time to discuss these things. At least these people should reach to first floor- fifth floor then some of my talks will go
in their heads. To say such a thing suddenly that make people think what a mad person is speaking, then what is the gain out of
it?
I was too in the same search to find out that what the problem of human being is and how it is going to be solved? You will be
surprised to know that I had a great habit of meditation since my childhood. And when we used to live at Mount Road then also, I
have heard that now a very nice garden has been made, there is a temple of Mother Mary there, I used to go there and think for
hours on this subject, I used to think that there is a confusion in human being, there is a problem; there is only one problem- very
normal, that problem is such that the God has made this entire Universe, created entire "lila". Why? Just like a play is going on
and a man has conceded that he has to play this play very seriously. And I am the only one.
For example, there is a man and he is told to become Shivaji and play the role of Shivaji. Now he starts thinking that I am Shivaji,
myself! So, how to remove this madness? It is really a problem because all the people think that we are what we are, we are the
only one! Apart from that they just cannot think that they can be different from what they are. And when he just cannot think
about it then who will want to know about it?
Everybody has this thinking that the play which is going on is the ultimate truth. If you ask children then children consider the
whole world as a play. There was one child who used to come in our house. One day he asked me, ‘Aunty, why are you playing

this doctor-doctor?’ They think that this also is a play: there is a speech, people come and sit and then it is all over. In reality, this
is the truth. Children know each and everything. But we people have taken untruth for truth.
For example, we think that since we are born in Nagpur then we start belonging to Nagpur. Then we are born in Hindustan (India)
so we start belonging to Hindustan. Then we are born in Christian religion so we start belonging to Christian religion. But if you
ever ask a little child, ‘Son, who are you? Are you a Japanese or American?’ Then he will be astonished. He will be more
astonished, if you ask him, ‘Are you a Hindu or a Muslim?’ If you ask a little child, ‘Son, who are you? To maximum he may say,
‘Mother, I am your child and who else? Have you forgotten me?’ In fact we are human beings in reality; this truth we forget and
we believe in what is untruth.
When the British ruled here then they were in a very great untruth that we are British and these are Indians. They had forgotten
they were too human beings and these were also human beings and this is a very big truth. This truth is like that this is one finger
and in the same way this is another finger, then third, fourth, fifth, all fingers of just one hand. But this hand is also a part of one
body. We all are entangled in one thing, this is a great truth and this is the true fact. But if this finger thinks that I am separate and
this finger tries to press other and if it tries to bite it, if my teeth start biting my legs; such things I used to see in this world. I just
could not understand that how to convince these people-‘Look you are all one’. Therefore, it was necessary that everybody
should feel that their pain can be felt by them and vice versa. So what to do then? Because I used to feel it and I knew it.
Just now what Barin Sir [inaudible] told is true. When he came to Bombay he had told Me, but he did not give Me the reference.
He said that, ‘You have such guts in giving speeches and if you are such dynamic and everything then you should come in
political field. People like you should come in the political field.’ I told him, ‘Brother, please forgive me, this is not my cup of tea.’
When he continued to insist then I replied to him, ‘A circle of light is what just revolves in my mind.’ Because the reason was that
it has been actually revolving since long, but how to convince to people that what it is that I’m seeing .This was the big question
in my mind. Therefore, I studied little bit of medical science to understand what a human being is.
What is the name of this fuss? I am going to talk to you on this tomorrow.
But while seeking it I went to lots of sadhus (sages). Someone said you become my disciple, someone said become this, I said,
‘Ok.’ There is a Sadhuji in Haridwar, I stayed with him for many days and then with many more Sadhus. Slowly-slowly I came to
know that they were all 420 (frauds). They did not know anything about God. They did not know anything about themselves. They
did not know about kundalini. All they were looking was either money or women. They were all useless, they had no purity. They
were all liars. I find it very-very rare to get a real Sadhu. Even if there is one or two, they were all staying in Jungles. Therefore, I
was disappointed to know that the lie people do in the name of religion; I think they do not do more in any other thing or in any
business. But the way religion is made a business, the business to make money, there can be no bigger abhorrent thing other
than this.
That is why you must have heard about Jesus Christ, the one who was a big priest of peace, once took a hunter in his hand
started to hit those who were having their shops near temples. In our country, those people who run their shops near temples,
nobody hit them. But those who have made temples as their shops, those who are selling God in streets and those who have
collected millions of rupees, earned millions of foreign exchange, by making all foul and making them mad by bhoot vidya,
shamshan vidya, preta vidya (art of possessing dead spirit) and are looting them, there can no bigger Adharma and Pap
(non-religion and sin) than this. This bundle of sins just cannot be brought down from their heads. Because they just not only
scratch your money, if they had to scratch your money, just take it, if you have to pick pocket ;have it, there is no harm in it.
Because all these things are perishable. They are going to be remained in this world, but the source of your power which is your
own, which is kundalini, when they just spoil it, when they damage its path and debauch you by prêt and bhoot vidya. Then they
should know that no one has taken with himself this bundle of money and nor any one will. But what will happen to them while
they carry the bundle of sin?
But many of them are incarnation of devils. Big-big devils, these people who have come on this earth, these devils take name of
God. I have seen these people very closely and I came to know how conjurers are they, their tricks are simply tremendous. Like
Sitaji; how Ravana took her away, poor Sitaji- who was Adishakti incarnate, could not come to sense that this Ravana has taken

her away.
The same types of great devils have come and are doing this evil work in the world. Due to this Pret and Shamshan vidya so
much troubles and evils have come in our world. Because these evil souls are able to convert even a good man in to a unholy
man. They destroy their wisdom. It is wrong to play in their hands. When we do anything with over- enthusiasm then we think we
are doing right thing but when the act is over then we feel so bad and suffer: how we have become so fool to have done such a
thing.
In reality, it is all Preta Vidya, it is mass hypnotism. We are running amongst them and we do not have any idea that for
small-small things we are murdering and doing mischief. These people have collected 3-3, 4-4 crores of rupees, if you go and see
in their houses then you will be surprised to see that they live in big-big mansions, lives just like a great king.
Another kind of people has also come out of the world, who teaches to give up and take self-renunciation, take this and take that.
In reality, they want to befool you. Has God made self-renunciation? No, the one which is not made by God cannot be spiritual.
God has neither made renunciation nor has made such a strange thing to believe. Self-renunciation is a matter of inside, it does
not belong to outside. There are few men who are recluses from inside whether they are sitting in a royal palace or anywhere,
they are recluses, their feeling is that of a recluse.
I can say this for my father that he was absolutely a recluse by nature, extremely recluse by nature; it was just narrated by
advocate Sahab. But we have seen very closely that his generosity was to that extent that if he had anything and if anyone
reaches to him and says, ‘Salve Sahab, I am in big trouble and this is happening and that is happening’, then immediately he will
take out his ring and give him. One day someone told him, ‘Salve Sahab, whenever we see, you start giving, at least see if he
deserves it or not. This must be considered that you too have children.’ He replied, ‘Who are my children? Whoever’s children are
they, He will take care of them.’ And this is the reality, the one whose children are, he has taken care of them. You know that he
has not left any money for us nor he had made any will for anyone. Such type of man also lives in this world, makes his name and
leaves becoming a big man.
And there is also other who collects the dirt and filth of the world in the name of religion, collects money. If by getting money a
man can become happy then why I hear of movements in the countries where there is a lot of money and so much to eat.
Now I have come here for benevolence of you people: these people have got us down and told us do not go there, people will pelt
stones. I said, ‘is this is the way, we are not giving them more or less of cereals.’ But see the illusion of intellect that they have left
to throw stones at us. The reason is that we give so much importance to Khana-peena (eat- drink). In reality, eating drinking is
not such important. Nothing is such important; here nobody is dying of hunger. If there was anyone to die- then you see in
Cinema, there are thousands of people standing out to get a ticket, buying tickets in black. All the rickshaw-walas(tricycle pullers
) and tange-walas (horse cart pullers) keep standing there. There is no such a case for which you are throwing stones. But all this
is bhoot vidya. You do not know- it is just a bhoot vidya. All this are the symptoms of pret vidya and nothing else. Otherwise a
human being is not such a fool to do this kind of foolish acts.
So, in this way, in whichever country there is so much affluence, where people are very rich like America. In America, there is so
much money that a simple maid servant arrives in Cadillac car. So I used to think if there is so much of money here then why
people are sad? Today she arrives in Cadillac car and tomorrow she commits suicide. I said, ‘why are you committing suicide?
After all, what is the matter?’ In spite of so much of affluence in America the largest suicides are taking place in America. This is
surprising. One evident meaning must be clearly understood that it is not just money which is everything in the world. There is a
much bigger thing than money; which we are seeking in money. What a human being is seeking? He is seeking peace and joy. He
is not seeking money. He is seeking money just to get peace and joy. Peace and joy are obtained on the support of dharma.
And the dharma is not one of outside but one of inside- the one upon which we conceptualize. The day a human being comes to
know that, what is the power behind his sustenance, the very day he becomes peaceful.
I used to tell in a humor, if we go by an airplane and we find some rustic people also travelling for the first time in an airplane,
they were advised to carry less baggage. As soon as they got down to their seat, they took their baggage on their head. People
told them ‘what are you doing?’ They replied, ‘we are simply trying to reduce the burden of airplane.’ In reality we are also
reducing the burden of God, of that divine power, of that eternal power which has made us, formed us and the one who is going

to nurture and care for us like a newborn. In the same way we are carrying his burden on us. The day when we will come to know
that the one who has made us, who has nurtured us, who has raised us -is our only protagonist; the very day the burden which is
there on our head will instantly fall off and man will come to know that it is just a play.
As you are watching here that lots of lights are on, bulbs are on, you see here that the fans are also running; all this is happening
with a power. But if any bulb thinks that I am the only one who is lighting separately and it is me who has to lighten and if I will
not lit then there will be darkness all over. Then we will say to him that you are the greatest fool. But if we look at ourselves, we
find ourselves to be in the same position. The day when we will come to know that there is one power which is running from
inside and we are enlightened only because of the support of that power.
Now the modern people say that, ‘Mataji, how we should believe that there is such power, so and so.’ I say, ‘To which extent the
man has gone so far? To which extent science has reached towards?’The straight issue is that if anybody ask you then you
should ask him, ‘Does your heart beats?’ if there is any doctor, he will say, ‘Yes, so what?’ Then he will say, ‘Yes, it beats
automatically.’ There must be someone who has to do it. Who is he?’ Then he replied, ‘Nobody does it. There is a system which
we call as autonomous nervous system, that autonomous nervous system runs it.’ Then you ask him, ‘Then who is that auto?’
There has to be someone who is putting it in motion. Whether you call it auto or God or call it his power, whatever you name it,
there is some power which makes it run. We are having our digestion - automatically, how it is happening? We are breathing
automatically, how it is happening? Now you have given it a name that it is autonomous. But it is just a name that you have given;
by just giving it a name you have not said anything scientific. By scientific means that you have to give full detail about it, you
have to tell what thing it is. You just do not know anything about it. He started telling, ‘that is automatic’.
But imagine if anyone says that you can get command over it by your own and achieve it, then people from science will stand up
and say that she is merely a housewife and moreover she is from Nagpur and we know what she can do. By science things
cannot be understood. This thing lies within ourselves and whatever of the world is known, whatsoever knowledge which you are
finding in books, these are all known within. Nothing is known through outside.
Very great scientist like Einstein has also said that I have been seeking quite a lot, I had become tired of seeking, and I could not
understand what this theory of relativity is? After getting tired he said, to hell with it and left laboratory and moved to a garden
and started playing with the surf of soap bubbles. He has written in English that while playing with the surf of soap bubbles
suddenly, ‘Somewhere from some unknown; theory of relativity dawned upon me. From somewhere unknown this light came to
me.’ What is that unknown place? If anyone comes across it, if we happen to know the same so that the invisible becomes
visible then any man with scientific bent of mind should keep his eyes open. For what thing the science is about? Science is for
the redemption of human beings, to enhance it, for its well being, not for his destruction. And if science is made for this cause
then what can be a bigger thing than this, which introduces you to yourselves.
You think, that you all are listening Me and if I tell you a small thing that you pay your attention to yourself then nobody can pay
attention to himself. There are many big pandits, they will give lectures to others, there will be many lectures. But if I say that,
‘Brother, ‘Just look at yourself where are you sitting?’Then you will say, ‘How is it possible? How to look at ourselves? Nobody
can look at himself.’ You can look at others but not at yourself and to carry that glance to yourself is- what sahaja yoga is!
As soon as we know ourselves then we know that source through which the entire universe has been created. Just like there are
small-small gems in a necklace; in the same way you people are small-small gems. Since your attention is different on the gems
that is, why you think that you are different. When your attention will go to that source which is flowing in everyone, you will be
able to know the source of others too. This is what happens in Sahaja Yoga.
Sahaja- the meaning of ‘Saha’ is ‘along with’ and ‘ja’ means ‘born’, the Yoga which is born with you. In other words the instrument
by which one is going to be united with that power ,that is born with you, is spontaneously kept within you, for that you do not
have to do anything. What is to be done for that? What do you do for anything which is a living thing? Suppose there is a seed
and you want a tree to come out of it then do you stand on your head or take Sanyas (renunciation) or get the seed sanyas or do
anything of human beings which makes seed sprout? You just do not do anything. What a human being can actually do? He does
all dead work. If a tree dies than he make a table out of it. He takes a big pride in doing so. If at all a human being can do

anything which is a living work then we will be convinced that he can do something.
We do this! We do that! Now there was soil here and they have made a hall out of it. What a great accomplishment! This is all a
dead work. Where is living thing in it? The work done by a man is automatically get closed, but the work of God is the work of
nature .The work of nature gets automatically done , the seed gets automatically sprouted, to do anything about it is not going to
yield anything. That is why we just cannot do anything. This is done automatically within. But the biggest work for a human being
is when he is supposed to do nothing! Therefore putting him in a prison becomes greatest teaching for him. Ultimately it is a
blessing for Me if I am to be put in prison, and if you are to be imprisoned then it will be a jail to you because what is to be done
there while for me it will be a joy without having to do anything.
We are running away from ourselves, we are not able to sit with ourselves even for a minute. If we are happened to sit for 10
minutes with ourselves then we become bore, let’s go for cinema, and let us meet him! If a human being is asked to sit for 5
minutes with himself then he just cannot sit.
But whatever we are inside, are so beautiful and are so noble, our innermost is so much dignified and so effective that once it is
seen, a man instantly forgets everything. But since it has not been known; as if musk is hidden within and musk deer is searching
it out in this world. Same can be applied to the religion.
Like- Nanaka sahib has said, ‘kahe re ban khojan jayi, sada niwasi sada alepa tohe sang samai, pushpa madhya jo was basat hai
mukur mahi jas chhayee, taise hi hari base nirantar ghat hi khojo bhai’- why to go to forest to find Him, He is always there with
you just like there is a fragrance in a flower and just as there is reflection in a mirror, in the same way God is residing in you
eternally, seek Him within. They will repeatedly say ‘ghat hi khojo’ (seek Him within) ‘ghat hi khojo.’ It was just the prescription
that they gave to take the medicine and we are just cramming that prescription. Religion is also a prescription which we are
cramming; nobody knows how to do it? And what is to be done. In matter of religion whatever is to be done, then it would be like I
keep on speaking without establishing a connection. Will you be able to hear it? There is no telephone connection and I keep on
dialing; telephone will go out of order and nobody will be able to hear. First of all you should have your connection.
Sahaja Yoga is method of God’s nature which connects you to the Ananya (eternal) power, He has made this, and the same is to
be achieved by human beings. The day when a human being will realize that this is what is to be achieved, that is the reason why
God has created us. He has made you a human being so that you make your own instrument, in a full way.
A special system has been created within you, because of which two institutions namely ego and super ego are formed in your
brain, which separate you from that power. You make your own battery. Now when you have your own battery then you what you
do with your instrument is that you go here and there- ‘I have to do this, I have to do that’. You seek - first you seek in money, then
in power. If in this birth any person has abundant money, then in next birth he will say, ‘I do not want money, make me a minister
somewhere.’ Then he will seek in power. If he has not found it in power then he will seek in religion. But all of his seeking is done
from outside. The moment he is tired of all his seeking like Buddha also ; who was tired from all corners and he laid down getting
exhausted (and thought), ‘No, I am not going to find it in this way, I did not get it in it what I was seeking.’ The moment he got
tired, the very moment he was blessed and he ultimately found it. He too got it from Sahaja Yoga itself and all the big Gurus of
this world too have got it from Sahaja Yoga, everyone had achieved it through Sahaja Yoga.
You cannot seek God through any other yoga. I bow to Adi Shankaracharya, who is the eldest son of our country; he is very big
man of our country. Although, Hindu religion is very much degraded and we just could not understood what Hindu religion is all
about. Adi Shankaracharya has clearly said, ‘na sankhen, na yogen’ – God can’t be achieved by anything. And he also has said
that there are three types of people.
First types of persons are those who seek God in devotion, they do not have intelligence; they do not understand they have not
yet established a connection, then how they can talk to God. They cram like mad, shouts like mad and die after getting mad. But I
would have no objection if it would have stopped just here, sometimes in this madness a man gets connected to Paraloka (world
of the dead) and bhoot vidya etc. enters in him. It may happen.
Second type of person is a person with very sharp intelligence, very intelligent, but he has very unstable mind. He runs here and

there, run this way and that way. So such a person thinks of yoga practice, so that one can control mind. This is also very wrong
attitude. You cannot reach there by controlling mind. So that person controls the mind, thinks that by controlling he will reach
(there). Such disciplined mind, such mind cannot take you to God, the car in which brakes are applied cannot take you there. But
from this it should not be understood that the one who is indulgent or is very voluptuous, he can reach God. He can never reach
to God. But the person who leaves all these things to thinks that I have to seek that and he disciplines himself too much in the
name of religion, he also does not reach. Actually, we have to become, we have to just become.
Like, recently these ‘Hare-Rama’ people came to me and said, ‘Mataji, you have all the luxuries in your house.’ Yes, it is there, my
husband is in good position so I have everything in my house. Such is the arrangement of God that’s why we are living there.
Then how can you say that God has situations like so and so? So I asked, ‘Brother, do you mean to say by this, does all this things
make any difference in me?’ I said, ‘When you have not caught anything then how can you leave it?’ "I have given up this, I have
given up that, I have taken renunciation". I said, "You are advertising it!" To leave and to hold is possible only when a man knows
that you can hold something and you can leave something. But if any human being who just knows it that nothing is caught and
nothing is left then what is the meaning of renunciation? You don’t even need renunciation. Now see this tree: it is just standing,
is it an ascetic or a householder? You also just exist.
The day when you will just become, you will just become a witness then the all outward things will mean to be just a play going
on; keep on watching. If people are throwing stones even then you are watching, people are garlanding you even then you are
watching, people are coming to your feet then also you are watching, people are beating you with shoes then also you are
watching, both the things are to be seen: Everything is a play.
Like when Jesus Christ was crucified, everybody cried watching it: ‘He is crucified, He is crucified’; for Him it was just a play.
What does it matter to Him, crucifixion has no meaning for Him. The man who stopped a storm, could He not have stopped this
people? You just think, such a powerful person who could stop a storm, could he not have stopped these donkeys? If He had
wished he would have thrown the cross and could have destroyed everything. But he was saying, ‘Let us make these fools a little
fool!’ Therefore, He went on to fool and we think that He was crucified. How could He be crucified? Indestructible being cannot
be crucified; they come regularly in this world and benefit the world. Neither can anyone kill them, nor can anybody take away
their life. Nobody can give them misery and nobody can give them happiness. They live in the state of joy. Sahaja Yoga makes
human being in the same state. In fact, till now nobody came to know about it so strongly, as I did, but it is surprising that I came
to know about it.
In my previous lives also, many a times I tried it. When I was born, I was born in your Nagpur; there is something special about it.
I was born in Chhindwara near Nagpur and the parents that I chose must be special and also my brothers and sisters and you
people who are also residents of my Nagpur, there must be something special in it. And all of you people who have reached here
today, there must be something special in it also.
It may be possible that you have come here because of your good deeds in previous lives and you may get it. Now many people
also say that, ‘Mataji, it is very difficult.’ People say that kundalini awakening takes time, and it is not achieved so easily, it
happens to one in million. I say that, ‘Yes, may be it happens to one in million but this is not today’s situation.’ Now we have
reached moon. If we tell our grandmother that we have reached moon she will say, ‘It is just not possible.’ Even if she is shown
the photograph then also she will say, ‘No you have falsely made this photo and showing it for no reason, it is just not possible.
How one can go to moon?’ We believe we have reached moon, but the world which has reached moon, the one which has
explored outside, it will surely search it inside one day. Otherwise if the tree which grows too much outside, if it does not search
its source, if it does not find out its power, then it is possible that tomorrow it may get destroyed. And this is what is going to
happen. If you have not known your powers and the collective consciousness within; by knowing I don’t mean understanding it,
this is not a subject to be understood by intelligence; it just enters in you.
Now, some people who have come with us from Bombay, those who are realized, by the indication of fingers they will tell you
what problem you have? They can feel ii through vibrations. Each and every person emits from within different types of
vibrations. With this they can tell accurately what problem this person has, which may be physical, mental, intellectual, every type
of defect it may be; it may be from your previous birth, may be traditional. You can understand all types of such problems by the

indication of your fingers. And kundalini which resides in us and about which I will tell you tomorrow, when kundalini starts
raising upwards then she enables a man to see what a spectacle he is! And only by the indication of fingers these people
understands what it is? If this is true and if it is happening then what is there to worry about? What is there to doubt in it?
If tomorrow I say that I have got a diamond, it is kept here, whoever wants it, take it, it is free. What do you think, does anybody
will doubt? Is there anyone amongst you who will doubt? Everybody will run and say that ‘It is a diamond whether it is of glass or
anything else, take it, it is just free.’ If I say that this thing is free, which is joy giving: people in America were surprised to hear
that. They said that, ‘That Mahesh yogi came here, he takes 277 dollars, such a fellow came he takes 377 dollars, and you should
also take somewhat 77 for your work!’ I was surprised. I said, ‘See, as far as I am concerned, I don’t understand this. You better
decide its value. You only decide its price, whatever price you can give for this, you give. Anything which is indestructible in this
world, tell me if you can purchase it. If there is something which is equal to the dust of feet of indestructible thing in this world
then there is point where a man can say whether he want to leave it or take it. You cannot purchase it.’ If you could purchase God
from market then how He would have been God? Here all these sadhus are selling God in market, at that time we should apply
our mind that what are they doing?
One person came to Me and said one Babaji (wanderer) has given me a ring. So, I asked, why did you take it, you have already
millions of rings and if he is such a big donor then he should solve the economic problem of our country, he should give
everybody food, rings, watches; there will be celebration everywhere. But he gives it to only rich people, he doesn’t give it to any
poor, what is it? And then one should also think for two minutes that after all what interest does God has in giving you a ring?
Does he have no other concerns but to give you ring and bangles? If he wants to give you something then he will give something
of Param (ultimate) only. The one who gives you the ultimate is the Guru, and others are all thieves, you must understand this.
I have seen many brainsick things about Sahaja Yoga that I feel like laughing on the stupidity of man, whether I should take
money for this or I should do ‘Dravidi Pranayam’ (exercise) or people should make me dance or I should put them in any trouble
otherwise how it is possible? If it is possible then why not take it. Sometimes I tell people in a very normal way that I am your
Mother and I have cooked food for you, however I have made it is not your business. If you are hungry then taste it.
Recently I went to Singapore. There is a very famous international doctor of Malaysia whose name is Dr. Liang. He is a great
man. When he came to know that I have come, he came running; he came home straight from airport. That time I was dining.
After coming there he said, ‘Mother, I am hungry, please give me some food.’ I said, ‘Ok, so you have come!’ I washed my hands
so our hostess got upset that, ‘at least have food.’ I said, ‘No, now my son is hungry, I should go’. Though, he is 15-20 years elder
than me. But today he is settled down in it and within one minute he was realized, within a minute he got it. After getting it he has
worked very hard and he says that this is the only way to achieve God. But he was eager so he settled down. Otherwise others
have to be said, ‘this is the thing -that is the thing’, and they need to be convinced.
The one who desires gets it in no time. You should achieve the reality. But the thing should be real. That’s why I say that just now
there is no need to come to my feet. Considering his or her self esteem in mind no one should go at anybody’s feet. Therefore,
Mohammad Sahab prevented to go to anybody’s feet, nobody needs to go. Yes but when you get your realization, when you
achieve quite enough, then you will come to know that these vibrations flows tremendously through these feet only. And without
coming to feet this thing cannot be completed. This is true, then it is ok, otherwise there is no need to come to my feet. You will
get Darshan (act of seeing), it is a kind of disease in our country to take Darshan; that we will take Darshan of Shri Mataji.
Now what is there in having just a Darshan? Try to get something genuine, I am here to give genuine. There are not people to
receive anything genuine, at least in this city where I have lived for many years and in 42’s movement (Freedom Struggle)also I
have worked very hard here. I was very young at that time even though I never got afraid. You must be knowing that police
troubled me a lot; my brothers etc. will tell you. I was given electric shocks also and kept me on ice, but I never was afraid. My
whole family was frightened, but I never felt it. I said, ‘Let it go on, everything is a play.’ But for a long time it has been my desire
to introduce this thing for once in my birth place. But there is one saying in Marathi that, ‘Jithe pikte tithe vikat nahi’ means that
where there is abundance of something then it is not much appreciated. That’s why I thought let some time pass; perhaps
people of Nagpur will realize that a very big task is going to take place from here.

The place of Nagpur is very high, in my point of view, Nagpur is the Nabhi of the whole world. So, you understand it that how
much carefully and how properly Nagpurians have to live and should behave and how wisely they should think! Whereas whole
world is afraid of Nagpurians! Once I went to Lata Mangeshkar and asked her to come to a program. She replied, ‘No question of
me, I will not allow even anybody else to go there, Once I went there, they threw shoes at me.’ Another person also had same
experience. I said, ‘I am going to my parent’s place.’ They got Me down half way in Badnera, where Rukmani haran took place and
they brought me here stealthily in the same way (Rukmani haran) saying that ‘don’t go there otherwise people will throw stones
at you.’
The one which is the Nabhi of the whole world, where there is power of sustaining this universe, where there is a place of Shri
Vishnu on our Nabhi; who is ‘Palankarta’ (sustainer), where He resides; if so much stupidity is prevailing there then what to say?
But it is going to continue until you reach your place. Like there is a son of a beggar, he is wandering, he is begging. But the day
he comes to know that he is a son of a King then will he beg? This applies to the people of Nagpur that they have a special
fortune.
First of all our country is a Yoga Bhoomi (land of yoga), rest are Bhog Bhoomis (land of indulgence). We are running after Bhog
Bhoomi like fools. This land of yoga, in this land of Yoga, Bhoomi, there are lots of vibrations, in each particle. The people, who
were with us, began telling even before footing in Nagpur, ‘Shri Mataji, what fantastic are the vibrations of Nagpur!’ Everyone is
saying that what fantastic are the vibrations of Nagpur and here are you people, uninfluenced.
You are just not aware of the air which is spreading here. And in this place which is the Nabhi of whole nation. First, India is the
body of the whole creation. The human body is what India is and inside it is the Nabhi chakra, which was established first of all in
the form of a sustainer and which is Nagpur then you should know that how high the place of Nagpur. And is your place is so
high. If it is possible today then you must get it and the biggest thing is first to get it. Do not just come to feet, get something of it
today. It will take some time, I am ready for the session, and you should also be ready to sit. Sit comfortably and get it. After
getting it you cannot have the disease of cancer.
The disease of cancer can only be cured through Sahaja Yoga. I am saying it today and after ten years when this fact will come
from America then you will think that, ‘Oh, she was saying it!’ Get the 'disease' of Sahaja Yoga and you will get rid of all your
diseases! Through Sahaja Yoga all the diseases will be cured. Disease of Heart chakra, Vishudhhi chakra which is called cervical
plexus like cough, cold etc., diseases of brain- madness, of Bhoot Vidya, Shamshan Vidya, of stomach; all these diseases will be
cured. Except for two or four diseases which affect having come from outside, there is no cure or something which is dead.
Now in cancer, doctors say that take out the brain. They have just brought a big patient, they told me to see him, he was
unconscious, he got a big relief. But how I can bring his brain, they have removed it. I told them that it is a repairing shop, if you
have just removed the very thing then what we can do? So except this kind of things, all the diseases are cured.
Peace and thoughtless awareness will be established in you: you are in Antarmaun (inner silence) but aware of all outside things.
Your vision will have a state of witness. Your intelligence will become dynamic, it becomes unique. Such go up your
measurement that you yourself become knowledge.
By knowledge, for example we had once a very normal artist; poor one who used to come to Me. Now she is having her big-big
paintings are on display. One very simple musician got his realization, nowadays he is singing in Canada and everywhere. When
people say what is material benefit of it then I say what you get is a total material gain, what else! From where this materialism
has come? And from where all these powers have come? Whatever we think, consider: from where this has come? The source of
all above, in the Ganga (river) of which you are to be bathed but if your pitcher is already filled, then what I can do? Empty a little
bit of your pitcher.
As far as the devotion is concerned, Mr.Lal has just spoken on this subject; there is a fear of some misunderstanding. Therefore I
want to say that there is no need to have any devotion to me. Only thing is that you should be devoted to yourself. The issue is
not having devotion to Me, but only towards yourself. Don’t fight with yourself; don’t abuse yourself as to why I have done this

and that. For some time leave all papa-punya (sins and good virtues) outside. You have to have faith in yourself, it will work out.
It is like rays of sun, in this way the love is flowing. For that there is no need of any faith or something: it will be worked out on its
own. But you should have faith in yourself, that yes we can get it. After all, it is something special when it has happened to
thousands of people in the sinful place like Bombay then it must happen in this spiritual place also.
Tomorrow also, there is a program of meditation, etc. I don’t know, my time does not belong to Me, you ask these people. Today
also there was a mess that everybody told me that the speech is scheduled at 5.30 but actually it was at 5.00. So, tomorrow also
you take a note about this later. And now you go in meditation, do as I say, what happens in it I will tell you in advance so that you
are able to understand it.
You just put your both hands like this towards Me. Kindly leave some space around you for the reason that you people don’t
know how to swim. Imagine that you are sinking and then swimmers are going to save you. You don’t have to do anything. If you
will move your hands or legs then there work will go in vain. You sit normally and if there is anything tight in your body then just
loose it little bit. Sit comfortably as you do while eating. If there is any Tabiz (amulet) etc. in your neck then kindly remove it.
There should be nothing like amulets in your body; take it out, and sit comfortably. And after some time when I will ask you to
close your eyes then kindly pay your attention to your fontanel bone and don’t rotate your eyes upwards. As you think about your
household just sitting here, in the same way you should think what is happening here. Just watch and see your thoughts and say
to your mind with love, with love, ‘hello mind, just tell me what are you thinking?’ Say it with love to your mind. You will see that
suddenly you have reached to such a place where you find that you have become thoughtless. After getting thoughtlessness you
will feel that some kinds of waves are slowly-slowly coming on your hands. Just as it comes from a cooler ; cool-cool.
Some people will feel warm in the beginning, doesn’t matter, and if hot are coming then jerk it. But some people’s hands will
shiver, somebody’s heart will beat. It may be possible that somebody starts swinging or something is happening inside him then
such person should kindly go out. Before it starts, you go out. People will look after them outside. They should not disturb others
sitting inside. If somebody’s hands are burning simply then take it out yourself, if they are burning extremely then look at Me with
open eyes. If somebody is feeling giddiness then they should also look at Me. Those who have major diseases like serious type
of diabetes, serious type of heart trouble then those people should go outside. Those people will look after them. But if
somebody is sick normally then they need not worry like if there is stomach illness or other it does not matter. I do not see any
serious heart patient here.
If you try to be a little wise then everything will work out. Don’t scream, don’t shout, and don’t make noises. Lots of people have
problem of arrival of 'devis' (possession). We have seen in our meditation that no 'devis' come in anybody. Does Devi has no
other business? These are all bhoots (possession) which comes in your body. Therefore nobody should talk about the arrival of
the Devi. And the one in whom 'devi' comes, he should go out. Kindly go out and tell them that you have this trouble, they will look
after you.

1974-0325, Public Program Day 1
View online.
25 March 1974
Public Program
Birla Kreeda Kendra, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Reviewed
What is the meaning of Param Tatva, the ultimate element? How does it create? What is it? Lots of books have been written
about it. Lots of speeches, lots of discourses were given about it in this world. Much has been said about it. The word ‘Param’ is
emblematic of Paramatma. This is divine power, which dwells in each atom and molecule and sets in motion and does God’s
work. If you tell this and talk like this, no one believes this in this era. No one agrees with this. But, as I told you even earlier, I saw
a picture recently in London in which molecules of sulphur dioxide were shown. It was shown that between sulphur and oxygen
molecules, there was a bond between them and waves were coming out and even scientists call them vibrations. This was seen
and you can also see with your eyes. Scientists can tell about what is a molecule and what is an atom, how they are and how
they are located. The scientist can tell about the zad tatva ( root element). But about the Chaitanya (conscious) which gets
agitated in it what they refer to as vibrations, they are quite ignorant and they can not tell you anything about it.
Everywhere, that tatva is getting agitated; it is in the matter, flora and fauna and you. They are agitated in their place and the
whole is also conscious. That means that the param tatva which is gaining consciousness in you, is also in Baitak, this meeting.
The only difference is that one who has to know the Chetan tatva( conscious element), is not still awakened to the required level,
but only in human beings, the awakening has taken place, to feel the Chetan tatva. Only this Chetan tatva, the param tatva,
operates the whole world. Whatever is there in the whole world is made by this. If you say this is a fan, who has made this? This
has also been made by that power and today it has come in the shape of a fan. Even science is activated through the conscious
element and its influence, it is ingrained in the intellect. Even the voice which comes out of our face is governed by the Chetan
tatva. Everything is propelled by this Chetan tatva. From this account, you understand that life inside us is also due to the same
Chetan tatva, which is non-stop. The day heart stops working you will see that the speech will stop, the eyes will stop seeing,
thoughts will stop, talking and hearing will stop, this body will become a waste and finished just like an extinguished lamp.
Then what is the need to know about the Chetan tatva? This, one should surely find out. In this era, human beings think where is
the need to know all this. What is the need for taking God’s name? What do we gain by that? Why are we running after this? Why
are we wasting time? Why do not we enjoy life? But there is one big truth which is hidden from us, in the form of illusion,
happiness in the Chetan Swaroop. That is why you ask anyone in this world, ‘are you happy? He will say ‘no’! ‘Are you joyful?’ “no’!
Leave our country, but in other countries, where physical progress has been made, where people have reached such heights, they
have everything. Why are they very sad? Something to ponder! Many do not even get a thought, why are we not happy. We run
after everything. In all economic science basics, one sentence is mentioned ‘no economic want is satiable’.
Today you need bangles, you get them, after bangles you get the sari. After getting the sari, you need something else. After that,
you need something else. In general ‘no economic want is satiable’. That means your mind is searching for it in everything, but
nothing gives you satisfaction. You do not get satisfaction anywhere. No satisfaction anywhere, thirst goes on increasing, goes
on increasing. The thirsty man dies, is born again, he runs with that thirst. At home he is restless. He is not happy, he is not joyful.
The reason for this is only one, the thing that gives happiness, that thing is still not awakened within us. If there is a lamp, and it
wants light inside and outside, you have to light the lamp, there is no other way. If it wants to run away from light, light another,
how will it happen? You can never get happiness in this world if you turn away from Param tatva. I am not telling you anything
new. These things have been told by our saints and sages for thousands of years in this country, the yog bhumi and in bhog
bhumis also many others have said. And they said and died also. Again they said this again and died again. Lots of things have
happened but no one got this. The difference is I am showing a glimpse of joy. To get this joy you have to your darshan, visit or
see yourself. The one which is giving you joy inside is you and the eligibility to look inside is built within you. I only just do this; I

clean your mirror. Even about this people discuss and say ‘a human can get into this state only after eons and ages’ and how is it
possible? In this kali yuga man has become so disgusting, how can he get it? It has to be replied like this; only in this kali yuga if a
man can reach the moon, he may also be able to get inside oneself! Such compassion may come by itself to take you to that
state. Why can not it happen?
After all, for so long, you have been ringing bells, aartis have been given, evocations were given, thousands of Gods were
propitiated. And in Mosques God was being called with a loud voice, was He deaf? He could not hear? Either He was deaf or you
were a complete idiot. And if you have been heard and arrangements have been made for it, where is the need to doubt so
much? I do not take anything from your sack, I do not ask you for anything. I am awakening you. I am giving your powers to you.
But the man is very funny! He likes the one who snatches his powers and makes him dance to his tunes. He rules you from life to
life and loots your money, your respect, you like to dance behind him. Man’s mentality is very peculiar. Thousands of people
follow him, who dominates them and throws them down and makes them into a small crocodile and damns them birth after
birth. People race to him very fast and you do not want to look at a person who is trying to establish you and worship you. Why
do not you get this thought or why do not you think in the mad state I was running to him, what power did I get which is my own.
He is a guru who creates power inside you and who introduces you to yourself. He who snatches your power and makes a fool of
you, is he a guru or bell. You have to think for yourself. I see these peculiar faults in human beings. It surprises me. Maybe it is
difficult for me to understand a human being. Like it is difficult to look at us for humans.
The second fault I notice, is when a human is alive, they make his life miserable and after his death glorify him. Sitaji was driven
out of her house, no saint bothered about it. When she died they built thousands of temples for her. Christ was put on the cross
and when He died they built hundreds of temples. I can not understand this. When He was alive, did people not have eyes- those
who understood him, at least one or two were there. They did not listen to them. He had done amazing things they did not notice
that and they put Him on the cross! Mohammad saheb also met the same fate. Gnaneswar met a different fate. When he died,
they made scores of temples in this city of Mumbai. It is very difficult to understand humans. When a great man is alive, a man
turns away from him and when he dies in his spirit, then he will carry him on his head and try to identify with him and goes about
claiming he was so and so, his disciple, etc. Why is a human attracted to dead things, I do not understand. Why does a man love
destructive things? Only after realisation, I see the mind works smartly. Paying attention to dead things, the matter is the same
as death for oneself. Even if I make Virat’s picture of Virat to be displayed in front of you, it is not going to help. I sometimes feel
like that.
Is man’s search for truth or untruth? Why is a man in love with untruth? However, if you look at it, no one likes the untruth. If I tell
a lie to you, will you like Me? But if a man tries to search at the micro-level, he pays great attention to the matter and dead things
and he is sad, he is a sad person, the whole world is sad. What can we do to these fools? They are sad for no reason. It is like
this; Your lamp is embellished, decorated. You also light a beautiful lamp with a wick. You decorate the rest also. You light the
lamp, still you are unhappy, you are in darkness. You have to note this. You have to think about it. A fierce war is going on in the
world. You have known about the war which took place during the time of Kali’s avatar, now even more fierce war is going on.
Whoever wins in this, only he will decide whether the creation of the universe will be completed or finished. On one side are
devils and their armies, but largely they are in a dead state. Some devils have taken birth. Should we support them or do we have
to bring satyug into this world? Many people ask me, how will the poverty of this country go? Will it go with your chatter? How will
the Vietnam war end? Will it end with your worry? It will not, is it not? When you are talking about all this, you are diverting your
mind from reality. The war which is going on in Vietnam is happening within you also. The discussion of rich and poor is
happening inside you also. If you want to become rich, it is within you, if you want to be poor it is within you. If the Atma of this
country is poor, then how can the country become rich? There is poverty in our Atma. Because clouds have gathered, clouds of
ignorance. What I call negativity, clouds of that negativity have covered the whole world.
But I see that most of the ghosts have landed in this country. Did they not get any other place? You have given shelter to them in
your heart. Without distancing the poverty from your mind, the entire time spent on embellishment is wasted. You gave shelter to
such devils in your heart in this country, you can not destroy these devils also because their 'nishchar' (nocturnal elements) have
entered inside you. If they are destroyed, those nischars will eat you up. When you remove them, the same day you will not know
their whereabouts. But first, you decide whether you want to know about param tatva fully with all sincerity. There is no greater

wealth in this world. This is Param Dhan(wealth). You have to get all the Param Anand (Happiness) in this. You get it. There is no
need to shift your mind’s attention from here to there and there to here on all useless things. How will poverty go? Are you the
prime minister of India? Have you taken it on contract for all these issues? Maybe poverty will perhaps go but your ghosts will
not go. In other countries, there is no poverty, but other kinds of ghosts are active.
In London, Christ has said, "Do not get entangled with ghosts". He had told this, maybe a hundred times. All the Christian
countries are caught up in the issues of ghosts. The old people there are so busy in so many meetings etc, and the younger ones
are being looted by those who go from here. Everyone is going around on the issue of ghosts. No one has searched for param
tatva, not even looked at it. They call themselves great disciples of Christ. It is the same story in the USA - witchcraft is practiced
openly. They do various things like Banamati etc which we practice here. There are regular societies for it there. Here it is done in
the name of religion and God because we have double standards in our country. Here we do not know we have a lot of
pretenses. In this country, we have a lot of pretensions. We do not know how to identify pretense, what do we do with the truth?
These pretentious people have written it and you are running after them with closed eyes.
Maybe you are immersed in attraction, on the world stage you are sitting. You will be surprised to know that you are the chosen
ones. You are exalted ones that is why you have got your realisation. Please go and check how many people in this world get
vibrations from their hands. I have seen the so-called great people like sadhus etc., Who are those people who get vibrations
from within, I want to see. They all are pretentious people. You are getting vibrations from your hand. About these many great
people have described that man gets these in his exalted state. Many have said this. You do not do anything. You have to do
something and show it. That is the matter. When I see this, I am surprised. Do not you try to be smart with me? All the
cunningness has come from my stomach. Do not you try to be smart with me? They sit in front of me like sadhus. I know their
cunningness. These vibrations are flowing out from whatever little innocence you have within you. This innocence has come
from your Mother. Only that is flowing. Nobody can con an innocent man. This is true. Even if someone tries to con, there will be
such a drama, the person himself will be conned. If Sita was caught in the guile of Ravana, it was a display of her innocence. He
had no stature to hold her hand or misbehave with her. Where is the glory of innocence and where is the cunningness of Ravana?
No one can aggress an ordinary woman. But till such time he carried Sita on his head, he remembered his own mother. All his
greatness was reduced to the size of a small child. You have heard the story of Sati Anasuya, is it not? The condition of Ravana
was also similar. She has made her innocence dance. She got into Sahaja Yoga in her innocence. That will give you motherhood.
Only you are on the stage (Maybe Shri Mataji is referring to someone). No one else comes. No one comes, if someone comes, I
could show my miracles. They think, let it go on. Because nowadays a socialist pattern is in vogue. Only ordinary people have to
do extraordinary things. Ordinary people have to be made into extraordinary people. That is why no one comes, people go and sit
in jungles. You have come onto the stage and ganas etc., are seated in the background. You will also know about it. But
remember that every action of yours, every matter which you hide from me, every trouble you create, everything is being written
down. They will throw you down in such a way, do not ask me why this has happened, we serve only you. With this, you can not
get realisation. That is why I am telling you, again and again, to be careful. You need a lot of innocence in Sahaja yoga and also
whoever is innocent, they are all waiting to serve you. They are ready to fall at your feet. Do not try to be cunning. Then you are
spared. You are protected. Then you are in My shield. Save yourself from cunningness.
Today, at this auspicious moment, every time I have to say only one thing. Only certain moments in life are important. We go
from this shore to that shore. We cross the Bhavasagara (Void) after getting all the beating. When we reach the other shore, after
crossing the Bhavasagara, it is important to keep new hopes. Otherwise, you will not gain anything by crossing the Bhavasagara.
Whatever experiences you get after Realisation get wasted at the shore. I do not understand which injection I should give so that
they get up and stand. (maybe reference to someone in the gathering).
Today everyone has to take a pledge, who have got Realisation. From our hands let it be passed on to the hearts of many.
Whatever joy we felt, we will share with all. This pledge you all have to take. What are we doing about this? How prepared are we
for this? No guru ever had so many disciples as children. Our children are more than disciples. Kali Yuga and Mother's actions, if
you add them, there is a need to be careful. Establishing Mother happens with great difficulty. If it happens, such a person can
become very powerful. Do not waste your powers in fighting among yourselves. You fight with yourself, look at yourself, watch

yourself. And ask yourself why am I becoming so weak. Why? What is the matter? What is that I have not given you. What is the
thing that I have not explained to you? Someone said to give to charities, I have given to charities. Someone said dye my hair! I
have done! Someone wanted a son, I have given that. Whatever has been asked that has been given. Someone asked for the
knowledge, the secrets I gave it. If after giving each and everything, if there is hollowness, what can be done. I will only give, I am
not going to take anything.
But if you still want to get something, You have to rise. You have to take a pledge within yourself. I notice that in small issues
man gets frightened. I asked one person to sit here, another person to sit there, they have slipped away. I have asked someone
to recite the mantras, he slipped away. Have I not given you the knowledge of Atma tatva? Have I not told you about Param
Tatva? Was I stingy in such matters? Foolish people, who fight, what will they get? Someone can sit there, someone can sit there,
wherever one sits, one has to find a place in Mother’s heart. Even if one person dies with the chair, I will believe that there is
some importance to the chair. Everyone leaves his chair and also his sitting. Have a spiritual sitting. One who gets into the
depths, he will sit on the floor. You have nothing to do with the others. You can recognise Me, within yourself. You can reach Me
but you have to get inside yourself.
Those who look at others, those who have their attention on others, I want to tell them again and again that the organisation
does not mean anything to me. I do not understand anything about the organisation. Are you managing the organisation which is
inside your body? Your heart is beating regularly, your lungs are breathing, all the digestion is taking place within your stomach,
what is that organisation? Are you managing it? Who is managing it, that organisation? It is the param tatva inside. The same
Param Tatva is your organisation and it manages your feelings and handles that great job. But the habit of putting spokes, we
should be ashamed of it. In this country, such great people have lived here. In that dust, such mean people are born, I can not
understand, is it signaling the arrival of kali yug. Whenever your mind is filled with jealousy, you hate yourself.
Today on an auspicious day, I have talked about these things, stinking. ..bad, bad. It is such a good time, such a joyful time. Such
clouds were to form as if in this world some fresh breeze blows. In its place what do I see? Talk about jealousies. These are our
enemies, remember. In our great work, in our param work, param tatva wants to live and grow and fill with all the happiness and
joy of this world. You be alert and get that. If there is a small shortcoming of Sahaja yoga, it is that your freedom will be accepted
and it will be respected. Do not use your independence to hand over the control to others. Respect your independence and know
your freedom. I bet on that. There are some new seekers. Many are old Sahaja Yogis. They got their Realisation and they have
vibrations. Your vibrations pull me. You have a lot of vibrations but they have less intensity inside. The transmission is less. You
have a lot of vibrations. They have pulled me from London. I have come running only because of these vibrations.
I feel as if a thousand-petalled lotus is blossoming in this city of Mumbai. Lotus is blossoming at its place, but the petals are
looking pale. There be life in it, they know their life, they become fragrant and fragrance from all petals spread to the whole
world! That same day paradise and Paramatma will appear to you here in an integrated form.

1974-0326, Public Program Day 2
View online.
26 March 1974
Public Program
Birla Kreeda Kendra, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English, Hindi | Transcript (English) – NEEDED | Translation (Hindi to English) - Reviewed
Whether we believe in the Supreme Spirit (Paramatma) or not, It doesn't depend on our belief whether the Supreme Spirit exists
or not.
And even if we keep telling you that the Supreme Spirit (Paramatma) exists,

, And you believe in it," It still

won't make any difference. Even if you disbelieve, you will do so in ignorance," And even when you believe, you are still in
ignorance. Believing in it without experiencing it is also ignorance." And disbelieving in it is also a sign of ignorance. Therefore…
You should approach it with an open mind, You should approach it with an open mind, Like a scientist, A researcher, Who knows
nothing, Who doesn't have any preconceived ideas, Who hasn't already made up their mind, In the same way, you should perceive
it. Regarding this topic… Who knows how many books have been written by humans, It’s like an endless ocean, And out of that,
who knows how many people have written only falsehoods; All falsehood has been written; But what is the difference between
truth and falsehood? The mark of truth is that it reveals itself in every situation, And it never proves to be false under any test;
that is what truth is. Whatever we discuss with you, Or whatever we tell you, Listening to it like a scientist means, That we are
presenting a hypothesis, an idea before you, And later we can prove that idea to you; And those who are sitting here, who have
seen our work, They know that this can be proven. But keeping an open mind, Is very important, Because many of you have read
a lot on this subject; It doesn't take much to write, If you have a little money or Someone is ready to help you a bit. So, you can
keep writing book after book, And there's no need to seek the truth.
In matters of religion, who is there to ask why you wrote something? In religion, anyone can say whatever they want, Even people
like Hitler spoke about religion, and so did people like Napoleon, Because In the matters of religion, You can even sell
unrighteousness in the name of religion, Where is the law that catches them yet? Whosoever will, sell unrighteousness in the
name of religion, And there's no law yet to put them in jail for it. But if you are a worshiper of truth… And if you want to know the
truth, You should not fully believe even what we say. Until you see for yourself that what we are saying is real; You are human,
and you should stand firm in your self-respect, Not letting yourself be overwhelmed by whatever someone tells or writes to you.
That is not a sign of humanity at all. A person who, standing on their own, tells God that 'You do not exist,' Is far better Than the
one who says to God, 'Yes, You exist.' In Sahaja Yoga, we don't engage with people who are dependent on others. Yesterday, I
told you that in Sahaja Yoga, Your innocence is very important; But independence is extremely necessary. And so, you must sit
with an extremely independent mind, Neither accepting us, Nor rejecting us, until you have experienced it yourself.
Whatever we are saying, Until you achieve self-realization, you cannot understand. You simply cannot know it, Whatever it is that
we are saying. Just like if you don't have a connection, Making any phone call is meaningless. At the very least, At the very least,
when a person wants to know about religion, Realization is the minimum required state; Before that, a person Is not worthy of
understanding religion. As in our country, it was said in the past That only a Brahmin could understand religion; But the meaning
of 'Brahmin' was someone who is realized. Not every person was considered a Brahmin. Today, I told you that I will will take up
the concepts of Prashta Brahma and other topics. That will be discussed. I have explained before That just like a seed, Within it,
The blueprint of everything that will emerge from it is present, In the same way, consider the idea of a Brahman essence, That
there is a seed of Brahman essence, Which has no beginning and no end, Because the tree comes from the seed, and the seed
comes from the tree, Which is eternal. Brahm In such a seed form, You are standing in your awareness.
This Brahman… The state is like an ordinary seed which is endowed with creative power, just like a small seed has its
germinating power or its creative power within it. Similarly, this Brahma also has its creative power. And when it first bursts forth,
when it first starts to vibrate, when it first vibrates, then the establishment of Pranava occurs, the establishment of that power

happens. And that power, detaching itself from the seed, establishes itself in its ego and creates the entire Earth. And the seed,
assuming the form of God, observes this play. Just like a television is kept, He watches it, if He likes the play, He watches it, and
if He doesn’t like it, He switches it off. This very God is known in our scriptures by the name of Shiva. And that power is called
Shivani. We refer to it as Mahashiva, and others call it Supreme, Father, God, Paramatma, and the Holy Ghost.
Others call it the Holy Ghost, soul, and various other names. We refer to it as Mahashiva. This very power creates all of creation.
When this power begins to create, at that time, it creates in its own manner, it has its own way. When it reaches the human state,
this power, as I told you yesterday, is a material element and one is conscious; these two elements create the entire universe.
When the conscious element works on the material element, then the creation of the universe happens, and the entire universe is
formed. Continuing, we reach the human state. I have explained this in detail many times, but today I specifically want to focus
on Kundalini, so I want to reach there quickly. When the material power in humans in the form of a small child, in the mother's
womb, in the stage of two to three years, or two to three months, vibrates for the first time, at that moment, in its heart, the first
vibration that occurs, the first vibration that happens in the child’s heart is of God. That is what we call the soul.
Paramatma first manifests in our body in the form of the soul. And the power, from our head, pierces through the crown region
and enters into our spine, which is the spinal cord, and passes through it, and in the triangular shape settles in this sacrum bone.
Whether it settles there or not, whether it exists there or not, what is its state, whether it is real or not, you might ask, why should
we believe it? You shouldn't believe it at all, but I can show it to you. Even if you are not realized, if you have eyes, if you are not
blind, then you can see, that the Kundalini is situated there, that it is situated there as Kundalini, and immediately it starts
vibrating there, even in the triangular bone. There is no reason for a triangular bone to vibrate, because there is no heart there,
there is no heart there, But there you can see that, if the person is wearing any clothing, it moves up and down, and sometimes it
moves very vigorously. Then you see that when this thing rises up. While it's rising up, it pulsates at certain places, and in some
places, the pulsation is so intense and visible , that, like at the heart chakra, where it's at the back, Here you may seem that as if
the cloth is lifting up. It is lifting up. For this, whatever, we conducted the experiments and tests, That people have witnessed
with their own eyes.
Those who say that Kundalini does not exist, who do not believe in Kundalini, should come once and see for themselves that
there is something called Kundalini within you, there is something called Shakti within you, and it is in your triangular bone, not
anywhere else. You can witness it directly. You can see with your own naked eyes that Kundalini is within you. After that, you
also see that slowly, it feels like something is moving in your back. For some, just by looking at us, it feels as if something is
moving quickly. This is due to the merits accumulated in their previous lives. The merits they have gathered manifest instantly
and the Kundalini rises forcefully. And for some, there are obstructions. It rises slowly, then goes back down, and some feel heat.
The reason for this is that within you, the path of the Kundalini is as I am showing you here, like this, related to a hole as if it can
be pulled from here and from there.
You see this, right? These two other powers are within us, which are Ida and Pingala; I will talk about them tomorrow. Due to
some reason or another, they pull this path towards themselves, and because of this, the path becomes blocked, and the
Kundalini cannot rise, it gets stuck where the path is blocked. This Kundalini is the manifest Chaitanya Shakti. I explained about
Chaitanya to you yesterday, that Chaitanya knows everything. Chaitanya recognizes everything. Not only that, but the entire
creation of the universe is done by Chaitanya. And Chaitanya is love. This Kundalini is also the embodiment of love, your own
mother. There is a slight difference, your own mother has no other child; she knows everything about you.
Like a tape recorder, she has recorded everything within her, what faults this child has, what difficulties it faces, what pain is in
its body, what suffering its mother has, what troubles it has gone through. This is all manifest, In today’s modern era, if anyone
talks about Kundalini, people will mock them. But in these times, while you are waving the thousand huge banners of science, the
moment has come that you will again have to look up towards the path of Dharma, because science has now realized that what
we have known so far. In medical science, cancer… What is cancer? No one really understands. Those who boast about science
with pride and arrogance, let them explain cancer to me. There are many great doctors, but they can't explain it. I'll tell you,
cancer is exactly what I said earlier, that… …due to the Sympathetic Nervous System, the actions there of… due to it’s overactivity
it happens, and there is no cure for it …other than Sahaja Yoga. Today, I’m saying this; people might accept it after ten years, …but

by then, who knows how many people will be afflicted with cancer. The world is strange, …when you discover something, …the
human mind is such that it finds something, and then hangs him, …ignores him.
But after death, …temples will be built for them, and …they will be honored. Today, while I am alive, I’m telling you …what this
disease called cancer is. I say it's the overactivity of the Sympathetic Nervous System. Even doctors are now ready to listen. But
if one or two doctors get cancer themselves, …they come to Mataji’s feet. …But then, Mataji doesn’t have time. Because I am
…more focused on realization, not cancer. But if doctors would open their eyes …and try to understand this, …and not worry about
what will happen to their money, …then they themselves could treat this disease, …and heal people. The scientific approach
about Kundalini, If you want to ask… then I would say, you believe in your eyes, don't you? If you do, then see with your eyes …that
if under someone's lower back bone, there is a pulsation After all, what is that?
And after it happens, …while you are fully aware, …if this state of thoughtlessness is being established …then what is that thing
that is making you thoughtless? Ask the biggest psychologists if they can establish this state of thoughtlessness within us. They
might your breath and calm your mind, …but if they can bring you to that inner silence and peace …while you are fully conscious,
then …we will agree that your science is great. Without inner peace, we cannot bring peace outside. But open all the books of
psychology and read them, …and go to any psychologist and see if they are at peace. How can they treat us when they
themselves are afflicted by the same things we are? But no matter how much I speak, …or how much I try to explain, …take
caution, …this is the era of Kaliyuga, …and in this Kaliyuga, the time for a great transformation has come. And along with that, the
whole world is being arranged because God, …who is overseeing everything, who is the witness of all, …is eager to switch you off.
He is observing, if the play is fine, it's for us; else calamity. You are seeing what kinds of things are happening in the world today;
…the kind of things the world is facing today; …there are wars, poverty, …diseases, it's unbearable to watch.
And no human can find a solution for this. Some say bring communism, …some say bring socialism, …some say bring this
ideology, others say bring capitalism; But for any of these to succeed--- Without attaining that ultimate bliss, Without gaining the
power to play those strings, You can never truly experience joy, And you cannot be satisfied. Satisfaction is found only at the feet
of God, But when I speak of God, The modern names come up, Haha, "Mataji, please continue" (Unclear) Everything is fine as
long as I talk about science, But as soon as I mention God, it's okay, People have so much ego, They have become so arrogant,
who do they think they are? The God who created us And who created the entire universe, We are challenging Him, Who are we to
do that? We could be uprooted and thrown away. We see unrighteousness in the name of God, Talking about sex in the name of
God, If you do that, Then you are considered a great religious person; Even Kaliyuga (the dark age) has its limits, We are truly
drowning in the sins of this era. If you can wash away sins with science, If you can create love with science, then I concede to
science. But if our speech remains just a speech, And you experience nothing, and until you achieve nothing even while I'm here,
then my coming here and speaking is in vain. Such is the power of Kaliyuga, Such darkness and arrogance have overshadowed
us, That we don't consider anyone else but ourselves. The entire creation is not even equal to a speck of dust on His feet, that
supreme God.
I don't want to convince you of my words, But one day, I will make you witness it. First, I'm just preparing you. Today's young boys
And the society, that’s coming up today, No matter how much you tell them, their brain will not be receptive, The reason is That in
the name of religion, great unrighteousness is being established. No one talked about Kundalini, Who talked about Kundalini in
those days? The poor ones didn't say anything, and they were still crucified. Kundalini is present within you, And it can be
awakened. If you want to see it, come, And if you don't want to see or know it, Then you will have to bear the sufferings of
ignorance. But you must at least think one thing, what after all, are we doing, where are we running around , what are we gaining?
Within yourself, All the deities are seated within your own body. Now people say, How can Mataji say that there are deities within
us?
I will give you proof of that right now. One person complains of stomach pain, they come to us and say, "Mother! I've had pain In
my stomach for many days," another comes and says, "We can't have children"; I said, "Okay, look at me." Looking at them, we
see that the Kundalini is settled in the Swadhisthana Chakr. A small child will tell you that, there is heat coming from this finger.
All the people sitting here, You all will see, with her eyes closed she could tell that there is heat coming from this finger, this
thumb. What more science can there be? Everyone says the same thing, that they feel heat in this part. I am not telling you this,

When asked what illness they have, they say, "I have pain in the lower abdomen," Someone says, "I have trouble urinating," And
someone else says, "I cannot have children." All these diseases related to the autonomic plexus, Which are driven by the
Swadhisthan And you can feel it right there, Now what more proof can I give you that Even a two-year-old child will point to this
thumb, And everyone will point to this thumb and say, "Mother, here!"
And then when I tell that person, "Okay, take the name of Brahmadev and Saraswati;" As soon as they take it, they immediately
say, "Mother! My pain is gone." Now, do you need more proof than this? Brahmadev and Saraswati are sitting right there in
person. If they weren't there, how would this work be done? And if you take anyone else's name, nothing will happen. What more
proof do I need to give you all? Whether you call it rational or irrational, Those who see this and still don't believe it Those who
have a problem in their Muladhara chakra, They feel heat there. If there is a strong obstruction there, an obstruction as it's called,
Or if someone in that society is possessed by a spirit, where he sits, Then they feel a strong heat, even to the point of getting
blisters. Many people who are moving around, call themselves God and so on, Forget them, even their disciples experience it,
and blisters appear on their hands.
Their hands get burned, Their fingers get burned, all of their fingers get burned together. My granddaughter, who is two years old,
is born realized. She runs away from everyone. Everyone feels burning in just one finger. If everyone feels burning in just one
finger, then there's a catch in their Agnya chakra. And on the Agnya chakra where the cross is, Jesus Christ sacrificed himself on
it. And Jesus Christ is there, whether you are a Christian or not, His presence is evident. Those who call self Hindus and those
who call self Christians Everyone thinks of ways to create enmity, But no one thinks of ways to love. Everyone has here inside
place for Jesus Christ, and right there is Lord Ganesha Who is the personification of Omkar. The recognition is that Lord
Ganesha had no father, and neither did Jesus.
But if there's a lunatic person, Or someone possessed by a spirit, or someone mentally deficient, And if they come in front of us,
Then, when we are helping them, or freeing their Agnya chakra, if we tell them To take the name of Jesus Christ, the Agnya
chakra will immediately open. How do we know this? That’s not a question because we just know. And even with this happening,
If you still don't believe That each chakra has a specific deity, Which the Adi Shakti has established from the beginning, Long
before you even existed, And those who are fighting among themselves, They should also know That the Gurus they are fighting
for are one and the same. Like we say about Muhammad Sahib and Guru Nanak, Muhammad Sahib and Guru Nanak were the
same person, This is something we can show from Guru Nanak's life itself! Once, when Guru Nanak was lying down, people said,
"Why are your feet towards Mecca? The Kaaba is in that direction, how can you lie with your feet towards it?" He said, "Okay, I'll
turn my feet the other way," and the Kaaba moved. What is the Kaaba but the dust of Muhammad Sahib's feet, and it is the same
for Guru Nanak Sahib. Because they are the same person, and we show you this recognition through the Kundalini.
When someone gets cancer, Either Guru Nanak Sahib can cure it, or Muhammad Sahib can, no one else. In our Void, In this place
that we call Void, Which doctors call Chance, Which we call the Bhavasagara, The one who get us cross the Bhavasagara is the
Adi Guru Dattatreya, All these are their incarnations. Without taking the name of any one of them, The ailments of void in you that
lead to cancer, The sign of cancer is that here, the Kundalini strikes rapidly; You cannot be cured. I want to ask, how many
Muslims and how many Sikhs are here? Muhammad Sahib forbade one thing, which was drinking alcohol. He said not to touch it
and said nothing else, for that he was even murdered. We know, in what condition he was put to . And today, I want to ask
Muslims, they will surely drink alcohol. And if a little is left in the mosque, they start fighting. And they surely drink alcohol.
And not just that, they even write poetry about alcohol, making it divine. When our Guru showed us the path of truth, They
constantly strive to break that path and engage in hatred for themselves. They are thinking of spreading hatred throughout the
world. So, what can be done? And in that, the ego… It is so deeply hidden, so subtly hidden within us, this ego. This ego was given
to you specifically, "Aham Karoti," to make you act. What is my role? To attain it, to carry out its work? I was given the power;
What is a brush meant to do?
It is meant to completely support the hands of an artist, to surrender itself. But instead of surrendering, this ego has infiltrated it.
The entry is made. We have seen its form too, Sometimes the Arabs are puffed up, sometimes these people, Sometimes they are
puffed up; everyone's days are about to change. You should know That if any harm comes to any country in any way, Not just the

country, but the entire world will be destroyed. The same goes for every person. If there is no harm within us, The force that
created this entire universe, The subtle thread that flows through all of us, Will be shocked. And what scientific proof do you
want? There is no scientific proof that is enough for the blind. For them, the strange thing is that a woman folk, And that too a
housewife, how does she know all these things?
Who was Sita, who was Radha, and who was Marry? Were they some great scholars from somewhere? For you to know , Let a
little love flourish within you. We will settle your Kundalini. because it is the embodiment of love, It loves you immensely, and
when a person loves someone immensely, What do they want that this love must enwrap the whole world. Because the supreme
joy of giving love wants that it must be embraced by you, and by them, and by everyone. Everything we do for this supreme joy is
only for the glow of this love. You have been adorned for this light of love, as I said. Your lamp will be lit, but kept hidden. You
have been chosen for a great work, You are the chosen ones, selected from thousands, chosen from thousands.
Later, do not say that Mother did not tell this or that; We are ready to tell everything and will explain it in your ears. And there is
protection for you in every way. You don't need to run away to the forests from the world, there is no need. You don't need to do
any abnormal work. Within you, living in your household, within your children, this beautiful work will happen. And… Spring has
arrived, and you are unaware of it, The flowers décor is must to be, you who are sitting in front. I should hope that somehow, in
front of me, I wish to let that fragrance flow into your hearts. And then you will look at each other and say, yes, yes, yes, What a
beauty, what fragrance. Of all the beautiful creations in this world, it is man who is the most beautiful. Nothing is as beautiful as
man.
Such a beautiful thing has been created, It is indeed very divine. And this love that knows in these vibrations, this love that
understands, that recognizes and embraces this joy, There is only one thing, and that is man. In such a beautiful human heart, I
only wish that there may be a vision of that joy and then, he will receive that joy in abundance. Some of you are sitting with your
hands towards me, And in the hands of some of you, there is a coolness, like… it comes from an air conditioner, a cool breeze is
coming. Put your hands on your head and see, towards your love, in your mind, and you will see that no thoughts are coming;
thoughts will stop. But you are aware, fully aware. You will see that your…

1974-0327, Vibrations that is Love
View online.
27 March 1974
Public Program
Birla Kreeda Kendra, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Vibrations, that is love, that is knowledge, that is joy. The first word is vibration, which you can call waves or Param (Absolute).
When you touch a wire, the waves of music that are generated, you can call these vibrations. There is a big mess about
languages. Anyway, you can call it anything, but you can see these in actuality.
Recently when I was in London, they were showing photographs of molecules captured through Electro-microscope on the TV.
There they showed one molecule of Sulphur ioxide, in which there was one Sulphur molecule and there were two Oxygen
molecules and these were bonded together. It could be seen by the eyes, the picture was visible. About this, there was no
question, or language i+ssue or doubt. You are seeing with the eyes. In this way, some energy was flowing in the centre of the
three points, like something is flowing from the two hands, as though Sulphur has two hands and it is throwing towards Oxygen
with its hands and something is coming from Oxygen to Sulphur. You can see it with your eyes. It felt as if it was shaking.About
this they said that there are three types of vibrations, three types of waves are pr+
esent in the matter and science has discovered it now. And this was told by many in the world from time immemorial. These
vibrations which are present, can be seen clearly in the matter, you cannot have doubt about them. What is known and what can
be seen-these vibrations, what are they? In the sulphur dioxide molecule, which has infinite atoms, with what is it vibrated? What
are vibrations in this? About this science has used just one word- vibrations, nothing else.
I told you earlier also that if you ask doctors, what is the Shakti( power) behind the pulsation in the heart, they cannot give any
details, except for saying it is done by 'Autonomous Nervous System'. It does not mean that they did not do research on it, but
the knowledge they have is incomplete and very little, only a small part. About this Newton had once said, ‘I am like a small child
collecting pebbles on the shores of knowledge’. Even a great intellectual like Newton felt that he was quite ignorant. A man
starts becoming knowledgeable when he starts thinking ' Oh God, remove all the ignorance of Surdas'- (quote from Surdas who
was a great devotee of Lord Krishna and a poet).
You are not able to say anything about the vibrations, which are seen. Is the man's knowledge so hollow that he is not able to say
anything about the vibrations which are rising from every molecule and atom? That means that it is no knowledge. Vibrations,
which are knowledge itself, which is knowledge and complete knowledge is stationed in each and every molecule and atom. Like
My complete language and knowledge which is coming out of my mouth is contained in both but they both are unaware of the
knowledge flowing through them. Inside us, the same knowledge is flowing, but just like the Sulphur and Oxygen molecules, we
are also unaware of the knowledge that is flushed inside us and what we take to be the truth. And whenever someone comes to
identify the truth, since we are standing on untruth-’asatya’, we grudge. Even if someone comes to show us a glimpse of that
truth, we put him on the cross or we murder him; we finish him so that the truth is not revealed. Can there be anything more
childishness than this? The truth due to which, the Joy wants to blossom inside you, enter your heart and dwell there, you are
closing that path due to your ignorance.
If you want to understand it in another way, then let me tell you about the tanpura(a musical instrument). It is made of wood and
has a bottom chamber where the sound resonates and there are strings on the top. Until the fingers pluck the strings, no music
will be made or no music will be heard. But our fingers aren’t on the strings. Our attention is not on the strings, which give us joy;
our attention is on that tanpura, which is our body, our mind, our intelligence, our ego, etc. Until your fingers pluck the strings, you
will not get joy from anything. You may look for anything in this world, and despite all the searches you have carried on since
ages, you do it you will get joy only in when you pluck the strings spontaneously and the music is generated. The search for the

strings is being carried out only from a distance. Like I told you the vibrations in the molecule of Sulphur dioxide- they are the
strings I am talking about, the same vibrations can flow through you and split and complete the task for which you have come
into this world in human form duly decorated with ego, etc.
In the end, you become the enjoyer of that music.
Grand arrangements were made for this music and the great effort made to create the colour to carefully decorate the human
being – this colour cannot be found easily. If there is no one to pluck the strings, how can the music be generated? That is why, I
have not seen the joy anywhere in the world, where there are rich people, strong people, where there are powerful people. You
also will not notice any joy in them. The reason for this is only one; you could not lay your hands on the strings which give you joy,
because it is not physical and it does not have any particular shape. It does not have any shape. It is like energy; if you can hold
electricity, you can hold it also. But you cannot hold electricity and you cannot hold this as well, though it is inside you, it pulsates
in your heart and it does all your autonomous activities of mental, physical and intellectual functions. And that is pulling you
towards it. Knowing it is not only necessary but is also the aim of the supreme life. Until the world thinks about it and puts its full
attention on it, no problem in this world can be solved.
Recently I was talking to some people in London; people ask peculiar questions! One gentleman was saying, ‘so many people are
dying in Vietnam and you are engrossed in your Sahaja Yoga!’ I said, ‘in any case, by your blabbering, Vietnam war is not going to
stop’. He was saying, ‘suppose someone comes with a gun and takes an aim at you, what will You do?’ I said, ‘let them come with
the gun first’. So far, no one has tried the power of Vibrations. If someone comes even with some ill-feelings, he will shiver and
he will have problems in his hands and face. Many among you have seen that.
No one has tried the power of love, and we talk of it. We take it lightly, even though it's power is working in each molecule and in
each pulsation of the human heart. Love is one Shakti (power) which does all work in planning, creation of the entire universe.
This power of love is also called Divine. However you may call it, you have to understand it; In India, Shankaracharya has very
clearly declared very clearly, " Getting these vibrations is the attainment ofGod Realisation and with that man becomes an
instrument of Paramatma (God Almighty), he carries on all His work in a witness state".
But who reads Shankaracharya? The modern man is in a bizarre state. Until some Adharmic (inauspicious) matter is written in
Dharmic (religious) books, no one reads it. How weird is it? Unless some sex is included, he will not read religious text. There is
no connection between sex and religion. Whether it is today or whether it is in olden time, a man may not admit, he may not
understand, whatever he may say, there is no connection between sex and religion. I can prove and show it to you if you come to
any of our programmes. The awakening of Kundalini is not at all related to sex. On the contrary, when Kundalini is awakened, a
person becomes child-like. In this way, there is a strange confusion. Vibrations being seen at these times, at least point to the
fact that however much a man may pretend, he knows very little. He could know very little. Very little! What he could not know, he
gave big names to that. What I referred to as Vibrations, man calls it the Autonomous System in some places and at some
places, he calls it the Universal Unconsciousness.
All the problems of the world can only be solved with Sahaja Yoga. Even when I say this, these people get annoyed, ‘how did She
say this?’ But if you know and achieve mastery over this Shakti which drives the whole world, the Vibrations which inundate each
and every atom and molecule, when it starts flowing through your hands, is there anything impossible for you? Man is a
worshipper of Shakti. He says 'if I get the Shakti, I will do Sahaja Yoga.' He needs some change. In reality, you have the power
inside you anyway but it is in a dull state. Giving it freedom, liberating it, this is what Sahaja Yoga does. This is liberation, this is
‘Mukti’ (emancipation), about which man has written thousands of books. These are ignorant books and are written by ignorant
people. Books of knowledge are those which are available every day, at every place and which are proven. Ignorance appears to
have flooded the world.
When a man gets the knowledge, just the knowledge of who he is, which Shakti he is made of and in which Shakti he is
established, at once his inner being will change. His state will change and his ways will change. What he perceives as sorrow,
from which he trembles and runs away, in reality, in actuality it appears very beautiful for him. Just these vibrations have to flow

out of us, then from these vibrations, you can know, you get the knowledge of who the other person is. Start from here. What is
the other person? When a realised soul comes or when children come- two-year-olds who are realised, who have vibrations
flowing inside them, when they put their hands towards anyone, they will say 'this finger (little finger) is burning'. You ask that
person, ‘do you have heart trouble?’, he will say 'yes, I have heart trouble'. This is the place of the Heart Chakra, and at least fifty
percent of those sitting here can testify to this- absolutely right. You can know them on your fingers, even children can know. If
someone comes, you can immediately say about what condition the person is in, which chakras are catching, which centres are
catching that inside us. We can show it to you, but you have to come for some time to our meditation session, if you have timeyou are busy people! Then you can know on these fingers, you can test and know who is a saint, who is dissatisfied, who is evil,
who is greater evil and who is a demon. This is knowledge. Someone comes well dressed like a saint and he will sweetly tell you,
'I love you'. Later, you realise UNCLEAR Then you think, ‘he was looking like a good person, a saint, from the face but he’s cut my
throat’. Humans have no knowledge about themselves. However, mmost humans are very beautiful and extremely dignified like
the buds in the garden- they have not bloomed yet, and no one realises, spring has come in this garden.
When these vibrations are released from inside you, when you point your hands towards others, you enjoy. You enjoy it, you see
so much of it. People say, ‘this man is strange, he does not talk to anyone!’ No, no, look inside him, he is so beautiful. Between
them, there is fragrance, music; it is worth watching, you get a lot of joy from humans! However, we keep running from each
other from dawn to dusk, what a weird situation? An acquaintance may sometimes wonder whether he has walked into a strange
lunatic asylum! Because of ignorance, human being is so ignorant of the bliss with which Paramatma (God Almighty) created it.
Only Sahaja Yoga is such a thing, such a method, which is Paramatma's own method, because of which vibrations flow out of
your hand, flow from your feet. They flow from your entire body, like the sun's rays and peep inside others and awaken love in
them and give a push so that it starts to flow in them also and start a sort of chain reaction.
But for thousands of lamps to be lit, the lamps themselves should be genuine. You are just a lamp, realise this and you are
nothing else- with which there will be light in the entire world and you also have that thing inside you to light the lamp. But if you
have turned your face away, what can anyone say to you? How much we grudge! This is the specialty of our country; the
specialty of our country is ill-feeling. We don't like it if something good is happening to others, how strange! If a flower blooms in
someone's house we don't feel good, but if someone throws cow dung into someone's house, we feel like that. How strange is
the human! You tell me if a flower blooms in someone's house, you will also get the fragrance and you will also get fragrant air.
Only because of ill-feeling, we are unable to get this knowledge fully.
The waves inside have come to teach us love, give love and spread this love in the entire world. Our hearts are pulsating only to
bring the kingdom of love into this world; otherwise did Paramatma not have any other business than to bring such ignorant
people into this world? Did He not have wisdom thatHe created such fools, who were His own? But when one gets this
knowledge andknows about this one thing that is the great truth that once the thing about Param Satya (the ultimate truth) is
understood that whatever is pulsating in us is also pulsating in others., The vibrations which are flowing inside us, they are eager
to come out and flow from others and you can feel them on your hands, your fingers and on your spine and they are active on
your head.
Humans have to descend into a new dimension and arrangements for this have been made, but merely because I am speaking
to you in Mumbai, and I am not a leader, or I am not having two horns, they may not listen to Me. All the problems of the world
can be overcome in an instant if the whole world accepts Sahaja Yoga, but for the present, it appears to be difficult. But at least
you, though a small number, get your realisation. Nothing else is to be done, in Sahaj. I am going to talk about Kundalini Yoga,
which is born with you, tomorrow. It is also ignorance if you do not understand this pulsation.
If you want to adopt the power of love, you should definitely have one thing called innocence. If you are not innocent, Mother
Kundalini will not awaken. You may be outwardly very decent, you may be well known in this world, your photos would have been
published, you may be a saint, people may worship you as God, despite that Mother Kundalini will not awaken. What should we
do? She has kept Shri Ganesha at the door, Who Himself is innocence. For a man, a little innocence is necessary. People ask
'Mataji, what should we do?' I say, 'nothing, how much innocence is there? just measure it'. Check in a balance, how much
innocence you have and how much cunningness you have in your body? You complete this and that will be your bank balance for

your wellbeing. You always keep checking your bank balance, how much you have and how much you don't have. And based on
that, you work and based on that your ego builds up.In Sahaja Yoga whatever innocence you have accumulated over your various
lives, that will be encashed. Such people get their realisation instantly and there are others who are struggling to get it for years.
There is no one like a bad person, I have not seen a specifically bad person. Those who come here, they cannot be bad people.
But there is one thing; you are showing a little cunningness. With cunningness, you can not realise Paramatma; cunningness is
human's quality. You measure your innocence.
There is no measurement for this, no criteria for this. Only you can know, no one else can know. That is why children get it
instantly and after getting their realisation, they say 'we are getting it. He is getting cool vibrations and he is getting hot’. At My
place, we have a two-year-old granddaughter. If any cunning person comes, she will ring a bell; she has kept a bell with her to say
thatthe person has come and we come to know she is feeling the heat and she is feeling the discomfort. They played a song
about it, it is a big thing, it is a big thing. They came into this world to uplift the world. The poor people- their hands got burnt and
destroyed , legs have burnt and destroyed, how much trouble they faced from demonic, evil people? The innocent people like
Christ have been crucified, Mohammad Sahib has been murdered, is there anyone whom they have not harassed? Are you with
them or with innocence?
At least you think of your children, what do you want to give them? What type of world are you making for them, what statute
have you thought for them? Or history will record that Sahaja Yoga was founded during your time and you did not adopt it. That’s
when you do not have to give anything for that, you cannot give Me anything. You are at the receiving end, what will you give Me?
You realise that you cannot even give Me love. Because you have less love in you. You awaken love inside you, and once you do
that, what difference will be there between us to think about giving and taking. You have to give nothing, only you have to make
preparation for receiving. Like River Ganges might be flowing with strong current, just in front of your door, if you throw a stone
into it, will the stone collect any water? You will need a vessel, and the vessel will also be made of innocence. Only one thing, con
yourself, there is no harm. If you are conned nothing is going to be lost, nothing from this world will accompany you except your
innocence. Keep your innocence intact. Those who thought themselves to be smart, have been conned the most because they’ve
lost the valuable thing and accumulated stones and sand.
Today, we thought we would do some experiments. You also have come, I am thinking, tomorrow at 8:30 pm, we will again have
meditation at Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. But some people are sitting, nothing is going to come out of chit chat- you get your
realisation. If you want to become something, go ahead. But after getting realisation, I see that many just sit at home, I get so
many letters in London; ‘Mataji you have uplifted us, we have a lot of joy, this has happened to us'. What next?
Are the lamps lit so that they can be placed under the table? After getting your realisation, you should understand that you are
the chosen one. You are the token of that light which will enlighten the world. Leave the little boundaries, leave behind the
moments of joy which you have got and come in the open and give light to the world. If you want to give to Sahaja Yoga, this is it
and nothing else.
Day after tomorrow, I want to talk about the subject, about which a lot of illusions are spread, but it is a huge ignorance, which we
call ‘Pralok Vidya’ and in English, it is called psychology, subconscious. How people use it, how people are confused, and what
are its identities; I will tell you about all these. That is the plan for three days. What I have spoken so openly in this life, I have
never spoken before. At that time, people were not intelligent enough to be told about these. I am telling even the most secret
things openly so that people do not say later, we did not know, otherwise, we would have stayed back. You are only listening to
what I am saying, you will understand it only when you get your realisation.
If you want to ask questions, do it now, otherwise, they will confront you when you are meditating. One or two things I will tell
you, which generally people ask. How is that people get their realisation so quickly? Why not, why don't you think like that? How
is that man landed on the moon? If you go and tell My grandmother, she will not believe it even now. If someone can reach the
moon, some can surely reach vibrations. Some discovery can take place in this world. If something is discovered, it should at
least be tried. Even before trying, you ask questions,' Sir, how is it possible?' In the matters of ‘dharma’ (religion), man does not
ask questions when ‘adharma’ (non-religion) is sold in the name of Dharm (religion) because his freedom is taken away. I will

talk about it the day after tomorrow. I am telling you that when man will come fully into enticement, he forgets to ask questions.
Not only does Sahaja Yoga accept your freedom but also respects it because giving freedom is the obligation of Sahaja Yoga. If
you are enslaved, then what is the use of giving this freedom? There is a lot of difference between swachandata (independence)
and swatantrata (freedom), one should understand this. Freedom comes from man's wisdom. Do not be misguided. You have to
take care of yourself, your well-being. What do we have to bother with anyone? Why should we talk about anyone? So and so
wrote like this, so and so wrote like this, so and so said this. We have to be alright, we have to meditate.
When people sit in meditation, they say ‘Mataji, please cure us’. But, I say that the diseases will be removed from the roots. Why
don't you adopt that which removes all ignorance from the roots? The darkness is from the matter, why don't you burn it so that it
is finished. Now, we will all go into meditation for some time, if you have half an hour's time for yourself, please sit down. Don't
get up in the middle, those who want to go, they may go at the beginning itself. It will take at least half an hour and those who
want to leave can do so now because they may want to go to a cinema, they have to do some big work, someone has to go for
ballroom dance, all those can go. Sahaja Yoga is not for them. Those who want to seek Parmatma, may sit down and get it, at
least half an hour you should sit in silence and give your time. Rest all your work will be taken care of.

1975-0101, Letter to Sahaja Yogis, Parklands, Ice House Wood, Oxted, Surrey (ANANT JEEVAN, ISSUE 4,
Feb-April 1980)
View online.
1 January 1975
Letter / Poem
Oxted (England)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – Draft
Letter to Sahaja Yogis
My dear Sahaja Yogis,
I left you with a heavy heart and the silent sorrow in your expression made me feel helpless. How rich you are in your feelings !
As if the sea of Love was rising and its every crest wept in your hearts. I could feel the tempest of my Kundalini. How can words
express the sorrow which was witnessed by us in silence.
The three months passed away so fast. The only record of all the eventful moments is the deep feeling of gratitude for all of you
who did so much to acquire a place for Sahaja Yoga. How much you worked day and night and in such a short time achieved
your target. This is the miracle of Sahaja Yoga working through you my beautiful dearest children.
You are not like other people who have gone away from the field of kuruskshetra. Some are not even yet born to take the load of
the future building of Sahaja Yoga. Your task is tremendous and worthy of great glory. May God bless you all.
All such adventures are to be treated like sports (rflHr). Your metal will be judged and your power of love will be tested. Do not
get entangled in the webs of 'Maya that reduces your I. Please calm down and humble down yourself before the Lord. Sharpness
of language does not, behove a Sahaja Yogi. First develope a sweet tongue and then try to clean your hearts. Some people have
a very clean heart but an excitable nature. Now with Sahaja Yoga try to calm down your excitability. Bhajan singing will help you a
lot. Bhakti will calm your hearts. After realization you all had lots of knowledge about Kundalini and Sahaja Yoga but without
Bhakti you cannot achieve the balance. You have to get lost in Bhakti. Bhakti enriches your feelings. Try to feel the other Sahaja
Yogis without criticizing them. I am enjoying your beings, the beamy and glory that you are. I wish you all could do that and feel
like a drop in the ocean of love thus becoming the ocean itself. Bhakti will dissolve your angularities and impediments in the
collective oneness. I do not know how to thank you individually.
I will be writing to you later. With all my blessings to you.
Your Mother—Nirmala.

1975-0120, Talk to Sahaja Yogis, Kshma Ki Shakti Ka Mahatav, Power of Forgiveness
View online.
20 January 1975
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
In Kali Yuga, there is no greater method than forgiveness. The larger the power of forgiveness, the more powerful you will be.
Forgive everyone. Only the one who is big can forgive. What can a small minded person forgive?
I had said this morning to know the Dharma. Know the Dharma that is within you. You are standing in Dharma. The one who is
standing in Dharma has such tremendous powers within. Know this Dharma. Aah! It is so beautiful, those who are standing in
Dharma. The one who is standing on Adharma we do not have a competition with him. We are standing in Dharma. Our ways are
different. The one who is standing in Dharma his method is different from the one who is standing in Adharma. The one who is
standing in Dharma cannot have any accord with one who is standing in Adharma. We are having problems, discomforts but we
are standing in our Dharma. It is the greatest thing. Know your Powers within which is only based on Dharma.
And Dharma is nothing but love. And if love is everything then forgiveness becomes its part. How much can a person commit
atrocities by seeing our love? How much evil can a person do? How much can another trouble you, upset you? Let them.
Everything will be washed away with love. This is the only way in Kali Yuga that works out. I can't understand any other way. If
you think that there should be some old methods to use then it is not possible.
There is only one reason which I have told you before and I am telling you again that there are no complete saints or sadhus in
this world. In each sadhu, they have sent one, one rakshasa. They must have gone into your attention. Have you understood? If it
is some sadhu then its all right. "Paritraya Sadhunam vinashaya cha duskritaam" ( for the redemption of the saints and the
destruction of the devils). But if with the sadhu there is the devil sitting inside then he will have to be removed with a lot of love,
isn’t it? What a difficult work this is! You are standing in the saintly position and there is also the devil within. But if you are
standing as a saint and there is a devil within, you can remove it. But tell me how many pure souls are there in this world? It’s a
difference of degrees. And those who are going towards sainthood should collect saintliness. They should have nothing to do
with those who are not saintly. They are unsaintly, thieves and bilanders! What comparison with them? They are thieves and we
cannot be them, they cannot be us. It just cannot be. They are moving on another line and we moving on another line.
To rise in Dharma is the aim of Sahaja Yoga. There is no other aim. It is a straight calculation. Sahaja Yoga has nothing to do
with any of these things. You have to be awakened in your own Dharma, you have you get your own light and to know yourself.
Someone says, "Mataji, what to do? My chakra is caught this way, this or that has happened." To move them this way or that are
all primordial movements, which I am telling you. "Adi gati", Primordial movements, primordial. These have been made. But to
make it flow in a pure manner….if there are mixed things within then when you move your hands then it is moving mixed.
Without forgiveness, purity cannot come within. When purity will come then the light of Dharma will be spread…Pure and Nirmal.
Means the one who has Dharma will have to come into the light. Will have to talk about it, speak about it. But he should note in
his own behavior whether he is seeing Dharma or Adharma. If I had given you a lecture before Realization, it would have been
very wrong because it is a conditioning and that is the reason that all psychologists have finished the dharma. They teach that
whatever Dharma, they teach don’t do this , don’t do that. So, the mind gets conditioned.
But now this will not happen. Now whatever you want from the mind you can do. There will be no conditioning at all. Because I
have taken your chitta and put it between ego and super- ego. Dharma is rising by itself and you have done that. You have found
its way. And whatever worldly things you have known…that it is like this or that in the world, with that you cannot measure the
Divine. You cannot join the value of Divine with that. I am talking about Divine and you are joined to the worldly. The three

dimensions of worldliness have finished. Those who want to move to the fourth dimension with seriousness and depth… I am
talking about the fourth dimension… You cannot know the value of the Divine through worldly things.
What or how have we been troubled? Not at all troubled… I say that we are very comfortable. The way I have seen difficulties and
seen people in terrible difficulties and you will not find their descriptions also. These are such super rascals and such
descriptions I cant explain. But the state of society is much better now. And even your state is very good. But you must not
deceive and cheat yourself. It is a straight calculation. Whatever you are doing with Sahaja Yoga you are doing with yourself.
Now this question arises many times in administration. Such a question arises that what should we do? Is this correct or not. But
this is so easy, so easy that before taking any decision go into Thoughtlessness. Whatever decision comes in front do that. That
can never be wrong. But the decision will be spontaneous in thoughtlessness. And if you took that decision in thought then it will
be biased because your ego and super ego both will work in that. Whatever are your "samskaras", or worldly things you have
earned will be standing behind you. But if you do it in thoughtlessness then it will be an "abhinav", Divine, a miracle. A miracle. So,
when I am talking about Divinity then whatever worldly created ideas - pre-conceived ideas of human beings cannot guide God.
You must know that. He has His own standing and His own Being. If you desire that God becomes like you then it is similar to the
one who sells God for four rupees and says I will place him there. You will reach that level. He will as He is give Light and you
keep seeking your path.
You must know your Dharma within. To know your Dharma is very necessary, as to what a beautiful thing has been placed in you.
In this destructible body what an indestructible thing is flowing. Just like a confluence of the three rivers, Ganga, Saraswati and
Yamuna. Its stream is flowing. You cannot know this thing with the destructible within, or that which is worldly. For a second, go
into thoughtlessness and when you take decisions, you will take such decisions which is not in the likes of many- dynamic!
Absolutely dynamic! Then worry, fear, anger, servility, slavishness, inferiority and all complexes will all fall away. He will speak in
his grandeur. He has his own humility. Because he is so gentle, so gentle and delicate, that it is impossible to know how he came
in. Just like the moonlight came in.
So, now that you have been chosen then your importance is very great. Now you maybe thinking that I am such an ordinary
person, how come I have been chosen? The choosing will be among ordinary people only. And these very, very great people
whom you see in this world who are highly awarded, they will all become missing links. It has always happened. In every stage of
evolution this has happened you have seen. All those who were great mammoths, became over developed physically, they are all
finished. They were missing links. Only the elephant got saved. In the same way those who were over-developed mentally they
are now coming like the fox. And from those also there are much more developed. But from them the dog got saved. In the same
way it is in the humans who will rise from the ordinary. This has always happened that it has risen from the ordinary. And the so
called extraordinary who are the third dimension, they are not going to do anything. They will become the missing links in the
evolution stage. People will not know them as they don’t know that the chimpanzee was a missing link.
In evolution only ordinary people will be chosen. One has to be normal. All these big Sanyasis who are roaming are not going to
reach anywhere, you will see. They will all go into the missing link. And these highly awarded- I have given Realization to all these
kings, secretaries, but to what avail? They are all sitting on their positions. Do they feel that why the light should be lit within us?
They write to me that I am feeling great joy… Do they think of doing something about this? That we have got it and should share
it? When you have a special place then you have to be special too. From this ordinary only will the extraordinary come out. Only
that will blossom. Slowly, you yourself will understand that they all are extremely foolish; who can talk to them? They might be
big doctors, so what? They are just sitting. They have done nothing of value.
Our position is very high. For this you cannot be educated. There can be no education that I am going to teach you A B C D. This
is to be experienced with your daily experience. This morning I had told you something very great that in Sahaja Yoga you are a
part of the whole, not of the individual, but the whole. Know this point.
Gagangiri Maharaj is very great. At a much higher position than you people, let us assume. But for twenty-on thousand years he
was just going around in circles, poor man. Where did it happen spontaneously. He took rebirths twenty-one thousand times,
kept falling at the feet of God and lived in jungles then only did he get these vibrations. And now how come you are getting it so

easily? Because this is a new world. It is a new thing. You are the parts of this body of the Virata. He was made a symbolic man.
But you are all in the Collective. The one who wants to get out of the collective he must know that he will become cancer and be
destroyed. None of you is good or bad. One finger pains and the other finger will press it. If this hand pains the other will press it.
You are all joined together. You know that. When you can share your badhas, then why cant you share your wealth? You catch
badhas immediately, but why not wealth? The entire reason is this that at the moment we are just walking. You are still very little
children. We are going to burn ourselves, fall down a bit. One day when you grow up you will take the hands of thousands and
make them walk. If you get cheated, doesn’t matter. You are little. Come into innocence. But those who are cheating and thinking
that they are very clever must know that they will be removed like cancer.
There is another way too, where the one who goes never returns. But there is also a way to hell. Lot of people walk on that way.
They think that to come in front of Mataji, touch Her feet, wash Her feet means they are great Sahaja Yogis. This way is also
moving alongside. When the flower blossoms then anything that has to fall off the bud falls out and breaks and the fragrance
comes out of that. That which has to grow, grows; and that which has to fall, falls. They both move together. Life is like that. That
which has to grow, life will make it and the one that has to die, life will finish it. But there is a time for its storing and they go too.
And some go in such a way and they never return.
From the animal state you become humans and what is the use that you become insects after the human birth. Your competition
should be on Dharma. Are we in Dharma or not? Think like this for yourselves and about others think that how deep are they in
Dharma. And if they are in Adharma then why are they so? What chakra of theirs is catching? Look at it without expectations. Its
only a chakra catching? Then you can remove it by just sitting here by your desire. If he is a gone case then let it be. He has got
cancer. Leave it. But the one whom you feel sympathies with and one whom you feel will become all right, can be improved, you
have the ways. These are primordial movements and you can put them right with those. Share with each other. Increase each
others chakras. You should not feel bad at all. The one who feels bad he will be as wrong as the one who is troubling others. To
feel bad and to trouble are the same; are the two parts of the same movement. So one should not feel bad at all. If someone
says your chakra is catching you should be grateful to him that he could recognize it and you could not. If someone points out to
you that a snake is biting, you are grateful to that person, so the one’s whose chakra has been caught up should feel grateful that
person that he has pointed it out and you can clean it. Never feel bad.
You are so different from others because you have felt the vibrations. How many have felt it? You are greater than the big
people. But as yet you are children. You are children in Sahaja Yoga. Pope doesn’t have any vibrations. All these so called Great
people, these Shankaracharyas, and all, no one knows what kind of vibrations they have. You people can give realization and
take them beyond. And you are twirling the Kundalinis of people. What a great thing you are doing. Besides Ganesha no one else
could do this before. That is why the snake which is in Shri Ganesha’s hand is symbolic. With that he would twirl the Kundalinis
of people. At least you have got one of the powers that you can raise the Kundalini of all. And still you are looking at the worldly.
It is Divine, timeless. It has no location. It puts everything right. Just as much as it is delicate and loving that much it is
destructive. It will move according to its way. You just move the way you have to.
First of all put your Heart Chakra right. Clean your heart. Is our heart clean or not? Do we have anger towards anyone? Do we
have suspicion for another in our hearts? Check your heart. Heart is the greatest thing because the heart controls the brain, and it
is from the heart that we do all work. Yours and My connection is with the heart only. So clean you heart chakra completely. On
our part we think that a thing is like this Why the heart chakra? How much love have we given? How much did we trouble
another? Mr Desai wrote to me that you have helped my wife so much. I was very Happy. Then Mr Desai wrote a very helpless
letter about his wife. I said to so many people I have given so much and how has did she die? I sent her vibrations from London.
You must help each other in every way. Love each other. We will all become one in this bandhan. We are one body of the Virata.
And you people are sitting there on the Sahasrara of the Virata. I have made you sit on the Sahasrara of the Virata. And what
madness are you doing! I have to make one thousand humans sit on the Sahasrara of the Virata Purusha. It looks like a big thing.
By my saying this how many of you are feeling vibrations in your hand? You understand about the Kundalini, there is no doubt
among any of you? What of Me? I have ploughed the land and will wait and watch.
I know everything. Whatever you do anywhere I know it. Nothing is hidden from me. Within you all there is a lot of mess. You
should live in your Dharma, Peaceful and balanced. You have got a very big thing. Be satisfied. What is this making plans? What

is this, like a stupid person. Other people may do this but you all? For little things…this is not done…that is not done. What is this?
this is not done…that is not done….? In which direction are you going and thinking? You have to go to Delhi from here, and you
think what is the price of flour there? But you have to go where no flour or anything works.
Dharma works there so know the value of Dharma. What is the need for Dharmic people to know the price of lentils and flour? Or
what politics is cooking there? You know it. If you did not feel vibrations then it is a different thing. This flowing of vibrations is
very little. As yet you are babies. I am not ready to even celebrate one year of your birth so at this stage a Ram Ram (taking god’s
name) has been done forcefully. Look at yourselves. I am not going to tell you. ‘Has any change come into me or not? Has peace
come within me or not? Has any change come or not?’
I have pulled you out from the very subtle nadi within the Sushumna. I have pulled you on a very line which is as fine as a strand
of hair. The Sushumna itself is as wide as a strand of hair, and there are 4 layers on top of it. But it is through these vibrations
that people are getting better. One lady came whose face looked different. She said her asthma got cured. What is so great that
asthma got cured, cancer got cured! This is bound to happen. Whats so great about it? If you got electricity in your house then
everything will become visible. If the electricity came in it brought light. What is so important about that? But by the light coming
in what knowledge did you get? What new dimension did you see? What new thing did you do?
What I am saying, is it going through your head or your heart? If it goes through your head then there will be arguments. A dogma
will be made of it. Let it go through the heart, there will be light. If you want to enjoy love then bring it to the heart. The Heart
Chakra is what the Christians call the Sacred Heart. Within it is the place of Bhavani, Durga which is a very great place. It is not
within you to understand Durga. That all the rakshasas are also Her children. The whole world is Hers. A mother’s Shakti
destroyed them for the sake of Her love for Her children. To pull one’s own hands is very difficult. To give an injection to oneself
with one’s own hands is very difficult. So, to kill one’s own children to protect other children is even more difficult.
But to kill is a very great act of the Shakti; a very great act of forgiveness. That is Her power of forgiveness but in Kali Yuga there
is no need for you people to become Bhavani. Just become peaceful. Very peaceful…very peaceful. Your peacefulness will take
forward the work of Sahaja. You will see that people will say that in Sahaja Yoga we have seen such people who were so full of
anger, who were statues of servility and completely suppressed, have become miraculously changed. You are your own
advertisements. What other advertisement do you want? People should say what a man he is. He has such a large heart and is
so wide in all aspects. It is happening. There is a lot of change from before. But it can be done with full force. It is now all upto
you. Just as you understand, feel, listen to others, hear others peacefully. Feel others. You have got it en masse with others. Like
this hand knows from the other hand; and from the same hand the brain also knows; the heart also knows and all these are
moving together integrated.
In the same way, you will have to integrate. Then only will the thousand hands be ready, which in human form will be used. The
same thousands hands which have come out from the Sahasrara of the Virata will come out from human beings. And these
humans will be very ordinary. No great Rishis or Munis are needed for this to make them sit on the chakras. All these big people
are sitting on the chakras. Only the ordinary will come out from the Sahasrara.
I am saying that start bathing each other every morning in your own homes with vibrations. First check your chakras between
yourselves and then go out after bathing. Keep on cleaning. Everything becomes pure.
There is such turmoil in the world. You have no idea as to what is going on. A criminality is about to come. There is such a rule of
the rakshasas which you are not aware of. And the rakshasas speak in such a way that they have a great fraternity. They stick to
each other like glue. And among us, the way they work that they fall in an instant. Another falls there! That too in freedom. The
rakshasas have a great unity. What fun they are having by killing one and throttling another.
When the group of saints will be made, then just think what can be! Saints have never had a group. This is the first time. But if the
saints give up their sainthood then what is the use of such a group? All the qualities of a saint should shine through from you.
Now tell all your worldly and gross problems before. Then we will do the puja at leisure. Take all this questions’ cow dung and

throw it out. If someone has more faults then you can get together and put him right. But keep it without expectations. You are
not you and the same with the other. So, have no expectations and be awakened to another in that state.
If someone has a lot of problems then put him right. But you should not feel bad. If someone feels bad then do it subtly. Treat
him like who is sick. When you are coming to my feet then you can always tell by signaling. Each one will point out the same
thing. So clear out the problem. We should all clear out each other together. There is no difference but it actually happens that
one moves five steps ahead and then six steps behind. So the question is, "After how many years will they reach? Or will they
ever reach?" When you are in awareness then all will move in unison. Like the ocean is huge but its waves move together. The
movement should move together.
Man: Please don’t feel bad, may I say that I am neither here or there. In a small group this happens that they think that he is big,
or he is small, his chakras are new, he has this "badha" and this or that. I listen to both…
Shri Mataji: Now it is like this, you have one stick. Either you hit yourself or hit another. Better that you hit yourself. There is no big
or small. There is no seniority in this. There is a reason for this that you have come from the worldly. Where you see that one is
big, one is small, one is officer, one is below, one is this or that, one is king. Then one is sadhu, one is sanyasi. This is nothing but
a churning. One is up then down, up and then down. I am just churning and nothing else. But we have to see who steals the
butter. This churning is going on. Sometimes the cold will come sometimes the heat will come. The butter will come on top. The
butter will float as it has become light. There is no high or low in this. Look at Modi, where he is. I purposely pushed the Kundalini
there. Did you see that? No one is big or small. The one who thinks that I am big, or small, then remember then there is the
Mahamaya sitting there. I will catch hold of the Kundalini in a such that I will see who is superior or inferior. The ones who think
they are very great will be out.
I will deliberately make the Kundalini go down a few times. Because if I don’t make it go down then raise it and again I make it go
down, and again raise it then it will not work out. I will deliberately make it go down.
[The man who is talking to Shri Mataji is an old man. So, Shri Mataji says:]
Old people will also have to be a little wiser. This is for all the old people. I too am included in this!! All the elderly people should
know that in the worldly life you people are the leaders. You are the elders in the worldly way. So you all should be especially
better. All of you become one. You should tell the children in this worldly way. Like Mr Modi, he is a very great man no doubt. But
he also goes down. But one thing I have noticed that in every letter he makes a confession. His attention is on himself all the
time. That is why I am fond of him as he confesses as to his faults, that Ma you are right. Such a person will be able to climb the
first ladder. He wants to go higher he will climb again and again. But the one who thinks I am on a very high ladder….. We should
look within and think within and see that we are climbing and falling, climbing and falling. It happens to everyone, because a
churning is going on. In the churning [Samudra Manthan] there is no special position for anyone. The way of Sahaja Yoga is like a
drama and is something that is new and never been tried before. No one has ever done it or such a churning has taken place.
One Gagangiri Maharaj sat for years in the forests doing tapasya. His churning did not take place. He made himself on his own
power all alone. His matter is different. Yes he got the guidance as Ganesha’s guidance to you all. But who shakes his head
many times? How to make him understand? You are Ganeshas. In fact, you are babies. They are stuck in My churning, poor
things. One thing is true, that whether he is Shankaracharya or someone else, but no one knew so much about vibrations, the
technicalities, the primordial, the movements. Read Shankaracharya or others, where is it written? It is not written anywhere.
[Shri Mataji greets a little girl who just came and related a story about her granddaughter, Aradhana.]
These highly realized souls have come on this earth, who are amazing! They are all getting ready within the age of 10 or 12 years.
But till then you people don’t break my platform by wrestling among yourselves!! If this is done then will my children do then?!
They have come to play a big game. Now a little bit is alright but no dance of destruction! The organization will become
harmonious when this movement becomes one. If one man is speaking more then just cool down. Cool down! Cool down! You

feel cool so become cool also. Not hot, just cool. Coolness…Seriousness…. I am cool, on absolute zero. Earlier one went to the
Himalayas. Now there is no need for the Himalayas. You can all start your air-conditioners here. Be alert towards yourselves.
Look at your own faults. Look at your own chakras and help the chakras of others secretly. There is no need to tell. You can
move your hands secretly. When realisation is happening while walking on the road then what! The more secretly you do the
more pure it will be. The more love-filled it will be. It feels very good when something gets done secretly. It is happening with the
land. They are saying it is being done, it will be done in whatever way. For that one person should get after the land. Ring up
Swami Sahib and phone him and find out about the land. They will do it. (The Sahaja Yogis discuss with Shri Mataji whom they
have to meet for the land.)
I want a program in April and I wanted to talk about the incarnation of the Adi Shakti. But at this stage perhaps it is too early as
yet people do not understand what the Adi Shakti is. This Dilip Kumar the cinema person has also got his realization as he knows
my brother very well. My brother told me that he can ask Dilip and get the cinema people to help as well. So please tell me. If you
want then the poetry on the Adi Shakti, different types, then we can quote them but I don’t know how much people will have
interest in this…. (one Sahaja Yogi suggests quoting Meerabai as she is very well known). If some lady comes who is made ready
on this subject. Like Gopi Krishna (the dancer) who has many small children, or give it to some organization.. (the Sahaja Yogi
says that for that one will have to prepare the song, then a list. It cant be done so fast)
So, I think, lets have a variety entertainment. Because the subject of Meerabai is of ‘separation’. We are talking of ‘union’ (with
Divine). So, better than that is to have a variety entertainment. On the subject of the Adi Shakti, every religion will come in. So, for
the variety entertainment there should be the subject of the Adi Shakti.
We should make 3 teams. One team to collect money, second team should see to it that the program is done properly and the
third team should see to the expenses. There should be coordination. There should also see to the printing of a souvenir where
the printing etc can be seen to. For the program arrangement get the musical minded Sahaja Yogis to see to it.
[Conversation goes on].
[Translation from Hindi to English version 2]
1975-0101 Dharm Va Adharm [Hindi] Mumbai (India) 40min
Part 1 – 30 mins
First line (Unclear). In Kalyuga, for human beings, there are no other means except forgiveness and more the power of
forgiveness is with you, more you will be powerful. Forgive Everyone. Only those who are big can forgive, how can a small person
forgive. Today morning I said, know the Dharma, know the Dharma which is inside you. We are standing on Dharma. A person
who is standing on Dharma is so powerful. Know the Dharma. Aha ! how beautiful it is. We are standing in Dharma. We have no
competition with those standing in Adharma. But we are standing in Dharma. Those standing in Dharma have a different way
from those standing in Adharma. A Dharmic person cannot have a relation with an adharmic person. Even if we have a problem
and hardships, but we are standing on our Dharma. That's the most important thing. Know your Shakti from inside which is
Dharma and Dharma is nothing but love and when love is everything then forgiveness becomes one of its aspects. Who can
oppress and how much in front of our love, let us see. Who can be evil, who can strike behind the back, who can give suffering,
who can…(word unclear) ? Let them do it, in front of love everything…(word unclear). This is the only thing that fits into this
kalyug. There is no other method in my understanding. If you think any of the older methods can be used, it cannot be done.
There is one reason for that which I have told you earlier also and I am repeating now, there is no complete saint in kalyuga.
Every saint ..(word not clear). They have entered into your attention. Have you understood? If there is someone who is
completely saint, then its ok, paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam (

), but there is

an evil sitting with every saint person, then you have to separate that with extreme love. Now how difficult that task is? Whether
you are standing on saintliness or evilness, is up to you, but if any evil is glued on you, you can remove that as well. But how
many of such pure beings we have in this world today? There is a difference in degrees. And those who are going towards

saintliness should collect (qualities of) saintliness. They should have no relationship with unsaintly. Those who are thieves,
shrewd are unsaintly. What is their comparison with us ? That is theft. They cannot become us and we cannot become that. It
cannot happen. They are on a different line and we are on a different line. To awake in Dharma is the only aim of Sahaja Yoga,
there is no other aim of Sahaja Yoga. This is very simple, Sahaja Yoga doesn't have any relationship to all this. We have to rise in
our Dharma, we have to achieve our enlightenment, we have to know ourselves. Some people ask, what to do Shri Mataji? Do we
spin the chakras like this, like that? All these are primordial movements that I am telling you. But it will have a meaning only when
it flows purely. If there is mixed (impurity) in you, and when you move hands then mixed (impurity) moves inside you. There
cannot be purity inside us without forgiveness. And when purity comes inside us then the light of dharma spreads around, pure,
Nirmal. Means, those who have dharma have to come in light, have to speak, have to share. But there should be dharma in his
every gesture. He should think by himself that whether dharma or adharma is reflecting in his behaviour. If I would have given
this lecture before realization, it would have been wrong because there is conditioning. That's why all psychologists have
finished dharma and taught that each dharma has made us more conditioned by telling us do's and dont's. This is correct. But it
is not going to happen now. Now whatever you want to do, you can do. There will be no conditioning at all. Because now your
attention has been brought in between ego and superego. Dharma is rising by itself within you. You have yourself awakened it.
It's way ..(words not clear). And whatever worldly knowledge you have known, you cannot compare it with divine knowledge. You
cannot attach the value of worldly knowledge with divine knowledge. I am talking of divine and you are seeing it as worldly. The
three dimensions of worldly knowledge are over. Those who have to move into the fourth dimension with depth and seriousness,
I am talking of walking into the fourth dimension. You cannot benchmark worldly with the divine. Words not clear …the suffering
which I have seen and the people which I have seen, you won't find any abusive words for them, you won't find any description
for them. Very evil people. But that state of society is very good these days. And your state is also good. But don't do trickery
against yourself. Simple thing. Whatever you are doing with Sahaja Yoga, you are doing it with you…words not clear. Yes, words
not clear….in administration, the question of what to do? Whether this is right or not? And This is so simple, before taking any
decision, go to nirvicharita. Whatever decision comes from nirvicharita, juts do that. It cannot be wrong. Decision taken in
nirvicharita will be spontaneous, and that taken by thought will be biased because your ego and superego are working in that.
Whatever conditionings and worldly you have earned is behind you. But if you do in nirvicharita, it will be never like that. It will be
divine, miraculous, miracle. Because in hindi, miracle means something very high and in Marathi, it means something odd. One
will be miraculous of Hindi meaning and another will of Marathi meaning. So when we are talking of divine, your worldly formed
pre-conceived ideas cannot guide God. He has His standing and His being. You want that God should be like us, so this same as
those selling God (idol) for money. That level …words not clear. God is what He is, He will enlighten your way. You keep opening
your way.
Awaken Dharma within you. Know Dharma within you, it is very important to know this Dharma. How beautiful it is inside. There
is so immortal thing flowing inside this mortal body, like confluence of three rivers Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati, stream
flowing. Hence you cannot know it through which is worldly and mortal. If you go into one second of Nirvicharita and take any
decision, you will take such decisions which even these big people cannot take, dynamic, absolutely dynamic. Worries, Fear,
Anger, Servility, Slavishness, Inferiority, all complexes will shed. He will speak in his pride. He has got his humility because it is so
sweet so sweet, how it goes inside one doesn’t know. Words not clear. And when you are elected (by God), your importance is
very high. Now you are thinking I am ordinary person, how am I chosen ? It will elected from ordinary persons only. And all these
extraordinary person whom you see in world, in big big positions, will all become missing links tomorrow. It has always
happened in the history of evolution. In every stage of evolution it has happened. Those who became mammoth, developed very
big physically, became extinct, became missing links. Elephant was saved in them who was in the middle (path). Elephant
…words not clear. Likewise those who developed too much mentally, for ex. Fox became missing links and many like that but
dog was saved. Similarly among human beings, who will rise from ordinary only. It has always risen from ordinary. And the so
called extraordinary in three dimensions, are not going to do anything. They will become missing links in the evolution stage.
People will know them as they know chimpanzee was a missing link. In evolution, from ordinary only will be chosen. One should
be very normal. Those who are roaming like big sanyasis (saints/ascetics) are not going to reach anywhere, all are going to
become missing links. And those who are in big positions also are not going to reach anywhere. So many have been given
realisations, kings and words not clear. All are sitting in their thrones, does anyone feel like why this lamp is lit inside us ? They
write letters to Me that they are in bliss, does anyone thinks to give it to others. If you have a special place, you have to be
special. From ordinary only, extraordinary is going to come. That is going to refine. Slowly you will understand that these are big

fools, who is going to talk to them. They are big doctors, what to do ? Big fools they are, they have not done anything in whole
life. Lets leave it, what we have to do with it. Marathi words ..Our position is very high. And there cannot be education about this
thing to human beings. It cannot be that I educate you and teach A,B,C,D to you. This you have to see in daily experiences. And
the key thing which I told you today morning, you should know it that in Sahaja Yoga you are in Totality, not in Individuality. Now
there is Gagangiri Maharaj, he is on a very high position as compared to you (Sahaja Yogis), he spent 21000 years, 21000 times
he took birth and remained in jungles and he kept at Gods feet every time and then he got these vibrations. And why you (Sahaja
Yogis) have got it instantly ? Because it’s a new world, it’s a new thing, you are part and parcel of body of Virata. He was made a
symbolic man (apparently She is speaking about Gagangiri Maharaj). Its done. Forget about him. You all are in the form of
totality. Those of you who want to be away from totality, should know, he will become cancer and will be finished. No one is bad
among you and no one is good. If one finger pains, press it with another finger. If this hand pains, press it with another hand. You
all are connected together, you all know that you all are connected together. When you share your badhas, why do not share your
Dharmas. You call catch Badha instantaneously. Marathi words .. You all catch Badha instantaneously, then why not catch
Dharma. What is the reason ? Simple reason is that we are now rising, we are small, growing up, we are small children now. First
we will burn a little, fall a little. One day when (Sahaja Yogis) will grow up, (they) we will make thousands walk with (their) fingers.
They are small now. No issue if you get robbed. Be in your innocence. But those who are robbing are thinking they are very smart,
they should understand that they will be thrown out like cancerous cells. That’s also another path, where one if goes, never
returns. There also a way to hell. Many people walk on that path, they don’t know, they come and think that it will be a big deed if
I touch Mothers feet, if I wash Her feet. That path is also there, parallely running. When a flower blooms, the remains of a bud
falls off and there is fragrance from the remains. Whatever has to fall, falls and whatever has to blossom, blossoms. Both
happens at the same time. Life evolves like that. Those who have to fall, life will make them fall, will make them finish but they
also have a storing time, a storing period. They also go and some go in manner that they do not return. From animals, they
became humans. What is the use if from human life, you go to insect life ? There should be mutual competition in Dharma. Think
that whether I am in Dharma or not ? And think about others that how much are they in Dharma. How much I am into Dharma and
how much he (others) is into Dharma, and if he is in Adharma, why is he in Adharma. His which chakra is catching ? Only
because of Chakra catching (he might be in Adharma), there is no other thing. See from detached point of view. Only chakra is
catching, so it can be corrected by desiring. If it’s a gone case, then leave it, it will be a cancer. Leave it. Bury it. But if you think
that he (other) can be corrected, if you have compassion, if you think his condition can be improved, then you have all the
methods. These are primordial movements. You can correct them by those. Share between yourselves. Done feel bad. To feel
bad is same as to give pain to others. To feel bad and to give pain to others is same thing. So do not feel bad. If some (sahaja
yogi) says that your chakra is catching, then you should be grateful to him. If someone informs you that a snake is biting from
here, you are greatful to him. In same manner you should be grateful to one who tells you about your chakra catching. Remove
that (catch), cleanse that. However you are bigger than the rest of the world, because you have got the vibrations. How many
people in the world have got it ? Even such a big Pope doesn’t have it, I have seen it. You are bigger than these big big people, but
still you are children. You are children in Sahaja Yoga. Even Pope doesn’t have vibrations, these big big names, Shankaracharya
etc. whom world bows down, don’t have vibrations. You all can give awakening and self realisation. You all are managing
kundalini’s (of others) on your finger tips. How big a thing this is. Noone else except Ganesha could do this. The small snake in
Ganeshas hand was symbolic of this because he used to manage everyones kundalini. At least now you are capable of raising
others kundalini. (Speaking to Sahaja Yogi Mr Damle in Marathi). That is divine. There is no (word not clear). Word not clear. The
more delicate and loving it is, equally devastating it is. It is going to move in its own way. You just move like this. Marathi words.
First of all, cleanse you heart. Is my heart clean or not. Do I have anger against anyone in my heart. Do I have apprehensions
about anyone in my heart. This is the biggest thing because heart controls the brain and we do all work by heart and you and Me
and connected through the heart. That’s why first of all completely cleanse your heart chakra. We think from our angle that this
is how it is. Towards heart chakra. How much love we have given to others. How much …words not clear. I got letter from your
Desai. He has written for him he helps my wife very much. I was so happy to read this. My joy knew no bounds listening this.
Words unclear. I said I have given to so many people, how is it that she is suffering. Why I am bothered, I can send vibrations
from London but why you have been given this (vibrations) for ? Words unclear. Love among yourselves. We will get tied in this
one knot. There is one body of virata aud you are on Sahastrar of that body. I have put you on the Sahastrar of the virata and
what these mad people are doing ? 1000 people have to be made sit on Sahastrar of the Virata. It look like a very big thing. It is.
How many people have got vibrations on hand. You have received it. You understand kundalini, there is no doubt in that. What
about me. I have ploughed the field, will see. Marathi sentence. Worldly people might complain, but why you (Sahaja Yogis)

complain of small small things ? This thing didn’t happen, that thing didn’t happen. What does all this means. Which line are you
in and what you are thinking. Now if you have to go to Delhi from here, you have to know the rate of flour there. But if you have to
go where this flour etc. doesn’t exist, Dharma exists, then you should know the price of Dharma. For Dharmic people, What is the
need to know the price of Flours & Pulses ? In place of what Dharma is running there, (we pay attention to) what politics is
cooking there. You know all this. If you don’t get vibrations, then it’s a separate matter. This flowing (of vibrations) is a very small
thing. It is almost nothing. You are just children. I am not even prepared to celebrate your 1st birthday. As of now, it is coerced
(chanting of) Ram Ram. You should look at yourself, have I changed or not ? is there a difference in me or not ? Am I peaceful or
not ? I have pulled you from the ultrasensitive nadi of sushumna (central channel). Drawn on one single thin line which I should
say is equal to a hair strand. If you see Sushumna itself is that thick (hair strand). And it has four layers, one upon the other. But it
is due to these vibrations only that people are getting cured. Today a lady came whose face was looking totally different. She
was saying her asthama got cured. So what is the big deal in that ? If your asthama, cancer etc get cured, what is big deal in that
? It has to happen. There is no big deal in that. If electricity is brought in a home, then everything will be visible. Least of least this
will happen. If light has come, then what is its purpose ? At least you should be able to see everything. There is no special thing
in that. But after coming of this light, what is that you have known, what you have learnt, which new dimension you have seen ?
This is the speciality. Whatever is being said, is it going above the head or from the heart. It should go from the heart. If it will go
from the head, then arguments wlll be there, there will be dogma. If you allow it to pass through heart, light will be there. If you
want to experience joy of love, then bring it on heart. Sacred Heart in Christianity is Heart Chakra only. And it is the place of
Goddess Bhawani, Durga. And it is a very big place in the heart. It is not possible for you to understand Durga. All these
rakshasas (evil people) are also her children. This whole world is her place. Sentence not clear. It is not easy to give onself an
injection from own hands. It is not easy to kill your own children to save another (set of) children. But that killing is also a work of
Shakti (power) and Kshama (Forgiveness).
It is very big work of forgiveness. In Kalyuga, you don't have to become Bhawani. Become peaceful, become extremely peaceful,
extremely extremely peaceful. Your peace is only going to help our work. People will say we have seen Sahaja Yogis who were
ambassadors of anger, servility, and fear who became so gracious. You people only are our advertisements. Who else is
advertisement? People should say to you, you have such a huge persona, first class, you have so good temperament, you are
wider in every sense. It is happening, happening a lot. Lot of difference from the past. But it can happen even faster.
Part 2 – 12 mins
Now everything is up to you. Up to how you think about it, understand it. Listen to others, understand others peacefully, feel
others, identify with others, like one hand knows the other, this had is connected with brain also, heart also and all things are
moving in an integrated manner. All of you have to integrate. Only then those 1000 hands will be prepared which will be used in
human form. Those 1000 hands which are in Sahastrar of Virata, they will come out of human beings and from commoners. Big
rishi munis are not required, those have been made to sit at chakras. Those who are big are sitting at chakras and doing their
work. At Sahastrar only common people are going to come. Marathi sentence. First, clean the home. I am saying that you start
cleansing each other with vibrations. You give to him and he gives to you. First, see the chakras among each other and then
move out (to give others) after having cleansed and getting ready. You met Sharad, Sharad cleansed you, you cleansed Sharad,
cleanse and move forward. It is done then, the situation is Nirmal. There is a lot of trouble going on in the outside world, you do
not know what all is happening. Criminality is going to come, there is a kingdom of demons. Demons talk to each other and they
form a group, they get stuck together like glue and those who work for us, they go here and get separated and they go there and
get separated because they are in complete freedom. And see these demonic personalities, how they are collective, how they are
enjoying, they kill, they murder. When there will be collectivity of saints, think what can happen. There hasn't been collectivity of
saints till now. This is happening for the first time. If saint leaves his saintliness, what is the use of such collectivity? All qualities
of saints should reflect from within us. (She speaks to someone) "Lal Saab, you all had a meeting, you do it and then do puja.
Word meaning not clear …I will not be able to speak then. Words meaning not clear. Now you tell, any problem, worldly, gross,
everything, lets talk. And then do the pujan with comfort. All this dung, please collect it and cleanse it and throw it and then we
will talk. Marathi (What are the problems). If someone has a problem, you all can help and correct him but keep neutrality
(nirpekshita). You are not you, you are nirmal inside. You remain alert about others with neutrality, if you see any major problem
with someone, then correct it. Don't feel bad. If someone feels bad, then communicate with signs. For ex. If you come to touch

my feet, and someone feels bad, so it can be told in gestures. All will signal towards here. Let's remove it. We all can collectively
cleanse each other.
Yogi: There is no difference between each other
Shri Mataji: There is none. But it happens so that we move 5 steps forward and then 6 steps backward. And again 5 forward and
6 backward and then the question arises in how many years they will reach. Like this, they won't reach at all, they are standing
there only. This is the thing.
Yogi: Sound/Words not clear.
Shri Mataji: That also is correct. When you get to your awareness, it will move as one. For ex, in such a big sea, all its waves
move as one. Your all movements should be one. Now it is that either you hit this one stick to yourself or to others. It is better to
hit a stick to yourself only. There is no big and small in this. There is no seniority here. It has a reason, you all are coming from
the mundane world where you have seen that there a big, a small, an officer, a king, a sadhu (saint), dand sanyasi (ascetic).
There is nothing as such here. It is churning going on here. One up and one down, it's like that. I am doing churning only and
nothing else. Now, who steals the butter remains to be seen. The intelligent one will steal the butter. This churning is already
going on. Sometimes it will be hot, sometimes cool (vibrations) and butter will come on top. It will float in lightness. No one is
high or low in this at all. One who thinks he is higher or lower, then there is Mahamaya also sitting, understand it. Their kundalini
will be held in such a manner that they will see who is big. This is churning. Sometimes kundalini will also be brought down
intentionally, also because reason is that unless it is brought down, then up and again brought down and up repeatedly, it is not
going to happen. Intentionally she (kundalini) will be brought down. Those who are old should know that from a worldly point of
view, they are the leaders. You all aged and old and hence you all have to be even better. You all get together and tell children
from the mundane world view. Yes, spiritual anyone can. Those who are looking higher, even if they are standing at the first step,
they will rise. Even if they step down, again and again, they will rise. But if anyone is thinking that only he is at a higher step, that
is wrong. You should see and think from inside that you rise and you fall, you rise and you fall. It happens with everyone. Because
churning is happening. In churning, there is no permanent place for anyone. The way of Sahaja Yoga is absolutely new and till
now no one has done it and neither churning has taken place.
One man Gagangarh Maharaj, who sat in the jungle doing penance for years, you have no relation with him in this matter and he
will not be able to make you understand anything because his churning has not happened. He has made himself on his own,
alone. His matter is different. His guidance is just like Ganesha, who strikes his head many times as to how to make these
people (Sahaja Yogis) understand. Now you are Ganesha (apparently Gagangiri Maharaj), these (apparently Sahaja Yogis) are
not Ganesha, these are children. Agreed that you (G.Maharaj) are very big but these are children. And they are tied in my
manthan (churning). I am the one in between and making understand. One thing is there, whether it was Shankaracharya or
anyone else, no one knew about vibrations so much. So many technicalities, primordial movements, no one knew. You may read
Shankaracharya or anyone else. Is it written anywhere? Nowhere it is written. Some 200-250 living beings have come on this
earth. What beings are they, My God! They will be prepared in 10-12 years. Now till that time, you (Yogis) don't break my platform
(laughter). If my platform breaks, what will my children do? They have come to play in this world. A little bit is okay but do not do
Tandav Nritya. Organisation says that everything will fall in place if you all remain one. If anyone tries to be bigger, then others
should remain cool, cool, cool. You get cool vibrations, no. Should remain cool also. Coolness. Deep. Dharma is cool. It exists on
absolute zero, minus 275. On absolute zero it exists. That's why people used to go to Himalayas. Now you don't need the
Himalayas, you open your air conditioner (vibrations) here itself. Look at yourself, be aware of your chakras and help in chakras
of others, first secretly. No need to tell others when you can lay hand secretly. When awakening is happening on roads by just
walking, so what is it? The more secretly its done, purer it will be and more lovingly it will be. Feels very good when you do
something very secretly.

1975-0120, Dharm Va Adharm
View online.
20 January 1975
Dharm Va Adharm
Public Program
(India)
Talk Language: Hindi, Marathi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft, Translation (Marathi to English) - NEEDED
There are seven layers within us that we need to awaken in this way. Now, when we talk about machinery, people often think of
machinery that is not alive; but for a living machinery, it needs to be awakened, it needs to be awakened. However, many people
do not even understand what can be accomplished with these vibrations. I have told you that when vibrations are flowing
completely from within you and there is no obstruction at all, you are in a state of complete bliss; No matter if you have a
physical, mental, or intellectual problem, you can be completely healthy if vibrations are flowing strongly and completely from
your body. You are in the state of witness consciousness, thoughtless awareness; this is a sign, an indication, that you have
entirely become that power. Now, for those in whom the vibrations are not flowing, who remain incomplete, who have
deficiencies, the fault lies with them, not with the vibrations or with Sahaja Yoga.
I have said that physical, mental, and intellectual problems—your six enemies—will flee, and there will be no enemies in your
body, but they will still be useful to you. You can act as if you are angry whenever you want, you can perform any act you wish.
Your intellect becomes far-reaching. If you read the Gita after realization, you can understand what the Gita means, what it is
saying. You attain the essence of knowledge. This is not just an indication; you should also think about it. This is an indication
for you, a sign that is flowing within you. Just like a car is running, how is it moving forward? Smoke is coming out from the back;
this is just an indication. But why is the car running, and for what purpose? This also needs to be thought about.
When you were not in bliss, when vibrations were not flowing from within you, your contribution to life was nothing, no
contribution at all; you were only taking. You were taking from nature; you were taking from the environment. You were eating
food, you were using the precious things of this earth, everything that nature has created, and you were using them. You were
utilizing them. You were not giving anything back, only taking; you were eating food, wearing clothes, living in houses. In all those
things, whatever bricks you might have used, in all that, you took something from nature, from the environment, but gave nothing
back. But when vibrations start flowing from within you, you begin to give. You should understand how you contribute to nature.
Today, a husband and wife from Andaman came and told me that in their garden, the sapodilla tree barely produced a hundred
sapodillas, and they had no taste, nothing. And then, Mother, you came to our house once, and we washed your feet and poured
that water, and then we gave vibrations to that place. Now, in two or three days, we get around a thousand sapodillas. And they
brought some today to show. Such a beautiful and pleasant fragrance was coming from them. They also had banana trees,
which started bearing bananas. This means that our place has become so lush and green, it's quite astonishing. On the same
land, in the same season, without adding any fertilizer—nothing—just vibrated water was poured, and they gave their vibrations,
and see how nature responded. Now, when vibrations have started flowing within you, you have to give; you are giving vibrations,
meaning you are channelling the energy within you and infusing nature with this energy.
You are unaware of it; you do not know this fact. Just as the sages and seers used to go into the forests and meditate there.
They did this to become one with the peace, balance, and harmony of nature, to experience it within them, to let it impact their
chakras. By sitting in such a beautiful place, their hearts would be filled with joy, and by being there, it was possible that the
Kundalini energy within them would awaken, and they would attain the supreme element.
But after realization, you become so adorned with these vibrations that you yourself become a giver, knowledge comes to you
naturally, and you contribute to nature. Wherever you go, you may not be aware of it, but as soon as they see you, flowers, leaves,
trees, birds, animals, and so on, feel your vibrations, sense that energy, and experience joy.

You might have noticed a white dog here, which you might remember belonged to a very small breed and didn’t have a stable
source of food. Yet, it was very healthy. When we took it to the doctor, he used to ask what breed it was because it was a street
dog that had grown so well and was so intelligent with excellent health. The doctor said if it were entered into a show, it would
always win the first prize. It's something strange, and along with it, you can see its vibrations. Due to those vibrations, the dog is
also so robust and healthy. You might know that horses understand everything. If they see a ghost at night, they start neighing
loudly. Similarly, if dogs sometimes cry, you can understand that they have seen something unusual, that's why they cry; they see
it. They feel it. They might not see it with their eyes, but they feel it inside. They will cry, and you won't know why, but they will cry.
In the same way, the person from whom vibrations emanate is recognized by dogs, cats, snakes, and all creatures. Even children
recognize them. Your giving is complete.
Now you can enjoy nature. You can also inspire nature because this energy is flowing within you. Then you might say that this is
all-pervading, that everything in the distance is affected. Then why does each tree, thing, and leaf experience this?
This same understanding should be applied to humans: why is man so important? Why is he so distinct? Why does man hold
such significance? Why does nature constantly bow at your feet? Why is it putting so much effort into you? Although you are very
slow to progress, why? The reason is that when vibrations pass through a human, they become such that the entire earth can
absorb and embrace them. For example, consider a cow. You've seen that it eats grass, drinks water, and then produces milk,
which the calf can drink and grow from. If the cow were given grass alone, the calf would not be able to grow; it cannot thrive on
water alone. But when the cow consumes grass and water, the milk produced from it is what nourishes the calf. Similarly, in a
realized person, these vibrations enter and form a special sphere, an extremely subtle sphere within, which works even in the
most refined and subtle levels. These vibrations become very subtle, like what is referred to as "propane" in its most refined
form.
Similarly, in a realized person, these vibrations enter and form a special sphere, an extremely subtle sphere within, which
operates even in the most refined and subtle levels. These vibrations become incredibly subtle, similar to what is referred to as
"propane" in its most refined form. When they enter the human being and the capillaries, these vibrations become capable of
being absorbed. Such is the extraordinary subtlety of this process.
Another point is that nature has created specific places where such vibrations are concentrated. This means that while these are
not human beings, certain stones, for example, have vibrations infused into them by nature, and they are given form and shape,
like the sacred places in nature you are familiar with, such as Ganesh temples, Mahalaxmi temples, and the temples of Mahadev.
These places have been filled with vibrations by nature, so they are vibrated. However, the awareness, handling, and absorption
of these vibrations are not as effective as they are through you. Understand that there is an absorption that is extremely subtle. It
is an absorption that is extremely subtle. It is the subtlest of the subtle. You first absorb this within yourself and then you amplify
it. The all-pervading thing is flowing from within you, but it is absorbed within you in a specific way, and there is some
contribution from you to it, which makes it so subtle that people can recognize and appreciate it. Now understand your own
significance. Until it passes through humans, molecular changes do not occur.
But what exactly happens, you should think about, how does it happen, mother? What is that special thing that the all-pervading
power does when it enters a person? What does it achieve? You need to observe this. When you direct your vision towards the
vastness, what is the vastness? I will explain it to you through an example: if you place a light or illumination on one side and put
a picture on the right side of it, and then place a screen in front of it, you will see that a large screen is formed and on that screen,
a large image of the same is also formed. When these two things happen, then this is the Supreme Being and this is its power,
and this is the vastness. Within this vastness, all the creations of this power, from minute to minute, from the smallest to the
most subtle, will be visible. Because they become large, they enlarge, they become big.
Now, I have explained this in a very modern way, but this is not exactly how it happens because the dimensions are very vast.
However, I have explained it this way so that you can understand it.

Now, the vastness, which is also primordial, contains all the powers, and while these powers might seem small, their protection
can show you how big they actually are; what seems microscopic is actually a vast evidence. Within this vastness, you are also
present, and you need to observe what contribution you are making and how you are functioning there.
From the top to the bottom of this ‘Virat’, there are different places and spaces in the upper body, areas of emergence, places in
the upper part of emergence, love, and everything that exists in us, but on a much larger scale. And within this, there is also
religion, everything green, and even waste, and even the pressure you refer to as obstacles or negativity is also waste. And within
it, there are also different groups like the Rakshasa (demon) groups and the Bhoot (ghost) groups. As their states progress, they
rise from below and come to occupy the higher realms. As soon as you transcend today, you enter the realm of the Devas
(gods); you become Devas. You are not saints; you are Devas. The meaning of change is that those who are going to the realm of
the Devas are transformed. And thoe who have reached the state of Nirvikalpa (a state of no mental fluctuation) are completely
Devas. The power of a Deva is such that it is akin to the all-pervading power of the Supreme Being, which can be understood as
their blood; it flows within them and they infuse their divinity into it. Infusing divinity means adding antibodies. In other words,
adding antibodies. If we talk about it on a human level, we would say that the antibodies in the blood are weak. The divinity
makes the blood such that it becomes so subtle that it can penetrate deeply, into every cell. You are in a state where you should
ask the divinity to grant you Lakshmi (prosperity). Now, you should reflect on how significant a role you are playing in this ‘Virat’
power. Many people, including those within themselves, still do not understand how immense this is. The reason is, as you
people say, that it is your illusion, Mother! But even more than my illusion, it is your own madness that you do not understand the
existence of this thing, and you are not solving it. Perhaps it is for your own salvation that I have taken this form. To help you
accept this, not with the intellect, but with the heart, and to understand where you are positioned. What is your form, and what is
your current state? As soon as you understand that this is your current state, what happens? As soon as you realize that you
have become a king, your way of thinking changes. The smallness, incompleteness, and madness of it all become insignificant.
Now, he is sitting in the place of a king. The vibrated cradle, which you people might think is simple, is not; it involves a lot of hard
work. You have put in a lot of effort in past lives. Some of you have worked very hard, and those whose efforts were incomplete
for some reason will need to complete them in this life. However, there are also those among you who, having worked so hard,
have succeeded this time. Some are still experiencing incompleteness for various reasons, but these are also due to physical
factors.
We have explained the entire method and know-how to you. And we will continue to explain; I have come to tell you everything.
We are going to reveal everything, but even now, there is a lot of illusion involved.
Now, a letter has arrived from a gentleman who is very upset with us. He had come here from America and was upset, and then
he went somewhere to Pondicherry, where there is a guru named Vashistha who knows everything about us. The guru told him
that he did not understand, and advised him to go and touch our feet, as he did not comprehend where we are coming from. Just
as Maharaj Ghagargar says, he has spoken about everything concerning us. However, you people are not accepting it as much
as others would accept and understand; there is no deceit in that acceptance, but your own acceptance is what you are
internalizing. There are those among you who, having worked so hard, have succeeded this time. Some are still experiencing
incompleteness for various reasons, including physical factors.
This means that you are facing the end of civilization. The extent to which your eyes are opened is the extent to which your
acceptance has come. Your acceptance has nothing to do with what is happening; the more your eyes are opened, the more you
can accept. If your eyes are not open, how will you believe? Those whose eyes are open understand wherever they are. But
because your eyes are only partially open your understanding remains incomplete. The guru in Pondicherry, who was sitting
there and sent us a message, did not understand even after sitting in front of us, knowing us, and listening to us. He sent a tape
from there to tell us, and to inform everyone that this is the reality and that this is the divine presence. This is what Maharaj
Ghagargar refers to. Because they set rules for eating and drinking, they say. Therefore, understand the significance of these
vibrations. These were the things we are explaining now; they say this because their eyes are fully open. This is a direct
manifestation of their eyes being fully open. Whether you see or do not see us, we do not change. Whether you understand or do

not understand, we do not change. Therefore, how much direct experience do you have? How much have you understood? This
is also an indication, a sign. This is also a sign. It is a sign of your disconnection.
Now you will understand that creation itself was awakened by these vibrations. All creation can receive vibrations, and your
antibodies are affected by them. Divine power can be understood as antibodies, and demonic power can be understood as
demons; demons are the demonic power, and divine power is called antibodies. There is also an ongoing battle between these
two. You can impart this divine power flowing through your body; normally, people cannot. Only those who have attained these
vibrations can give them, and others cannot. Therefore, understand the importance of these vibrations. Because of these
vibrations, you can now give in this world. Previously, you could only receive; you received from nature, from creation, from your
home, from the sky. You received from all the five great elements, and you were living. And now you are giving, and what are you
giving—divinity! It is your own essence. Even where there are ten Sahaja Yogis, you have to give. That’s why I am telling you that
now you have gained a new perspective and new priorities. You are in a place where the Devas are, where Hanuman resides. If
you cannot see them, what can I do? But those who are able to see will see. All the divine beings are sitting here. They are all
present here. They have come with me, indeed with you. They are all stationed over you. They have all come; Ganeshji is seated
here. Everyone is in a seated position, and they are blessing you. I used to think about how it is possible that you are sitting here
with your hands raised, and your Kundalini has opened the Brahmarandra. It’s an impossible thing; no one can say it’s possible,
but it has happened to you. The reason is that you have divinity within you. Tell all these divine beings to pay attention to this.
In every meditation and every program, I am explaining this to you. If you sit separately and meditate at home, saying that you
are performing your own worship or meditation, it will not make any difference. I am telling you this because it is necessary to be
awakened, and this awakening will only happen with collective effort; everything will only happen in the collective. In the Kali
Yuga, power will be in the collective. This is a demonstration campaign; it is born from past lifetimes, but today it is not your
collective. Therefore, everyone should sit together and meditate, light lamps, and perform worship collectively. If you get a result
from doing something alone, sitting together for these things will yield a thousand times more results, and you will experience it.
I have personally seen that those who attended the programs regularly reached very high levels, while those who came
occasionally or not at all did not experience the same. Those who never come still have their vibrations running as they are. Now
you might say, 'Mother, we do a lot of worship and keep your photo, but we don't see any benefit.' Another thing you need to do is
give; until you give your vibrations to others, you won’t realize the benefit. Because until a person experiences it themselves, they
may not understand. I often endure this; if I make them place their hand on someone else’s, and if they feel the warmth, they
begin to understand. I told you that the more times your hand is raised for donation, the more times your Kundalini will rise, the
more awakened you will become, and the more you will be uplifted. Your situation might not change immediately, but those who
know, see, and understand are the ones you have not yet reached. Although I challenge you, even though you know everything
about Kundalini and understand everything, you still haven’t reached those who know and see.
No one knows as much as you do; no one at all. Even though Shankaracharya was a great figure, he did not know as much as
you do, despite being so significant. You are not even equivalent to the dust of his feet, but you have gained more knowledge.
The reason you have this knowledge is that you have learned it mentally, but you have not experienced it internally. You have
learned it mentally because I explained that this is what comes on this finger, and that is what comes on that finger, and so on.
All of this has been taught and memorized, but internally? Nothing has been experienced inside. You need to reach inside, and
you need to have a direct experience internally. Some people have incorrect ideas, some have incompleteness, and some have
other issues; all of this has gone away because they had no knowledge. What they have achieved is the result of their dedicated
effort and complete surrender. Your surrender is very, very, very minimal. It is very lacking. And for this reason, you do not
understand even the smallest aspect of these vibrations and their greatness. Shankaracharya mentioned that among millions,
only one or two might experience it, and among many, only a few might experience it, he had said. And those who remain will see
that, no, no, no, it’s all just an illusion, but they will recognize me and understand me. Then they will say, ‘This is the truth; it wasn’t
like this in our time, but now there is the Mother.’ They will say, ‘You people didn’t say this.’ Because your eyes are still not open
from within. The direct evidence is within you, and you need to understand this today. You have mentally understood me
because I explain many profound things to you, and I provide you with direct evidence of these things. I tell you things you
haven’t heard before, and you see them and say, ‘Yes, yes.’ Mentally, you have accepted me, but the internal understanding is
lacking.

When you know me from within, you will speak of it as being exactly like that. It is a simultaneous thing; as you understand
yourself, you will also understand me. That is the indication that is the sign. If someone is blind, you can see that they are
stumbling along. If someone is walking a bit behind, you might think they are somewhat blind, but if someone is walking straight,
it is a sign that they are not blind. This indication is what reveals whether a person is blind or not. It is the sign that indicates the
person is not blind.
This is a sign that is a sign; whatever behaviour, methods, or ways you have, they are signs of how truthful you are. There is no
need to speak it out loud or tell anyone else. This is an internal sign, and you deceive yourself, engage in trickery with yourself,
argue with yourself, and are caught up with yourself. If you let this go, if you do not mentally accept it, if you keep flowing, keep
expanding your heart, you will be amazed. Much can happen while we are alive; you need to think about it, and much can be
achieved. But in this matter, never be content with thinking that you have achieved a lot. You may be content with everything
else, which is very important. But when it comes to this, you must say no; we have not yet recognized it, the inner realization has
not happened yet, and we have not yet truly known ourselves. There is a need for a profound inner awakening, a need to truly feel
it. And you people have been chosen by God for that great transformation of the universe, which is called the transformation of
the cosmos.
To transition from one era to another, God has placed you people in this role. You are on that wheel, and you too are turning with
its movement. Therefore, ordinary, seemingly simple people must have such profound inner awakening. It must be felt deeply
from within.

1975-0121, Teen Shaktiya (Three Powers)
View online.
21 January 1975
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi, Marathi | Translation (Hindi to English) - VERIFIED, Translation (Marathi to English) - NEEDED
“Teen Shaktiyan” “Three Powers”, Seminar & Meeting, 21st January 1975, Mumbai (Dadar)
[Hindi to English Translation v1]
Just like a gardener cultivates a garden and nurtures it with love, and then he watches out for the blooming flowers in the garden,
the joy the gardener feels upon seeing those flowers is inexplicable.
The name 'Krishna' is derived from 'Krishi'. 'Krishi', you know, is 'agriculture'. During Shri Krishna’s time it was primarily
agriculture, and during Christ’s time it was irrigated with his blood. The fertile land of this world has been adorned by so many
incarnations before.
Today, in this age of Kali Yuga, the time has come when we can witness the blossoming of of that farming, to breathe in the
fragrance of those flowers.
These vibrations [Chaitanya Lehriyān] flowing from your hands is the same fragrance, because of which the entire world, the
entire creation and the entire nature is functioning.
But today you are those chosen flowers, chosen over the ages, to blossom so that today your vibrations and your fragrance
should spread across the world, cleanse its sludge and eliminate the filth of this ocean of illusion [Maya Sagar].
When looking at it, one may wonder how it is possible, Mataji is making a big statement. But this is a continuous process [Silsila]
and, when the destination has arrived in front you, then thinking, "Why it has arrived? How has it come? How can this happen?
When you were walking, did the destination not arrive? When you were seeking, will you not get your place?"!
But, when you have got it, why should there be any doubts about it?
Today, I want to tell you about three powers that the Almighty is one. He is not two or many.
I am just one. I am not many. But I am your Mataji, my husband’s wife, my kids’ mother, I am your heavenly mother, their worldly
mother.
Similarly, even the Almighty has three forms, three aspects.
In the first aspect, He is the Witness Form [Sakshi Swaroop]. He is the Witness to His play, of His power, Shakti, that He watches.
We call Him Ishwar. We call His power, Ishwareeya Shakti or Ishwari.
In our Sahaja Yoga, we call this the power of Mahakali.
The moment when this witness form of His comes to an end, meaning when He doesn’t want to see anything else, He dislikes
something, He shuts His eyes to the play of His Shakti, at that time everything comes to an end. That is why we call it as the
power of destruction [Sanhārak Shakti].

In reality, it is not destructive [Sanhārak]. But it actually does all the organisational work for whole of the world’s affairs and ends
it too.
The second power that the Almighty utilizes is His Trigunātmika Shakti, with which He creates the whole world. All the huge
planets, stars are created and an immensely pure Earth is created in this manner. In this state, the Almighty is known as
Hiranyagarbha and His wife is Hiranyagarbhini.
In our Sahaja Yoga, we call this Mahasaraswati.
The third power of the Almighty is the Virāta form, the power of Virāta because of which creatures are born in this world. They
achieve their evolution. Animals evolve into humans and humans [Mānav] evolve into super humans [Ati mānav], and the super
humans evolve into the Almighty [Parmātma].
This power of Virat is known as Mahalakshmi in Sahaja Yoga.
In this way, there are three powers of the Almighty that spread His splendour.
The first power is known as Ishwari Shakti, the second is Hiranyagarbhini, and the third is Viraatangna.
Sahaja Yoga work is the work of Viraat.
The Almighty has bestowed all the three powers in humans too. With one power, whatever is dead, man collects. This is the
power of Mahakali. With another power, man does all the future planning, thinking or reflection. This is the power of
Mahasaraswati. The power with which he achieves his evolution is the power of Mahalakshmi.
All these three powers integrate in the body of the Viraat, in His Sahasrara. He is the Adi Purush [Primordial Man].
The Almighty has made all the arrangements to create human beings in His own image.
The Mahalakshmi power ensures Her work is well organized for living beings. She makes so many selections, makes several
choices and ascends the deserving people, deserving animals to a certain level of evolution.
But a human being gets complete freedom to achieve that state so that in his consciousness, in his awareness, he can seek his
evolution and know how he has achieved his evolution. An animal can’t think about its evolution, but a human can think about it,
can see it and can know it too when these vibrations start flowing through his hands.
The destination has arrived. You all have reached courtyard. How easy. And Sahaja is all this.
But humans have really complicated themselves too much. It becomes very difficult for a human being to live with simplicity and
innocence. Religion is nothing else but simplicity and innocence. But when so many brains are involved, how can we talk of
innocence? That is why many small children attain realization very easily because they are innocent.
Many things are happening in Kali Yuga that you probably aren’t aware of.
As soon as the power of Virāta is strengthened, at the same time the powers of many people who were downgraded to hell
[Pātāl] like waste materials, whom we say ‘rakshasas’, grow remarkably too. Both the powers are competing against each other.
One power is dead and the other is living.

The dead energy can never be stronger than the living power. However, the living power is very sensitive. For this reason, it is
difficult for it to flourish. A plastic flower can never be more beautiful or more important than a real flower. Thousands of plastic
flowers can be made but just one or two natural flowers bloom.
That is why those who have thrived in Sahaja Yoga, who have achieved in Sahaja Yoga, they also wither, then thrive again, and
then again wither. Like a mother nurtures her child with utmost care and love, likewise Sahaja Yoga nurtures and nourishes. But
the child also has a power by which it must recognize its powers.
Through Sahaja Yoga, man can attain the highest state in a short span of time, for which the great saints and sages had to take
thousands of births and had to do austere penance for thousands of years, and meditate for ages.
We are extremely fortunate that we are born in this special era. We are normal people born for unusual work. This unusual force
is working from behind the curtain, helping you. The ordinary people have been chosen by Virata to reside its Sahastrāra,
because the ordinary has the Power, not the extraordinary.
In Sahaja Yoga the foremost thing is that there should be innocence and peace within. Peace is satisfaction.
Someone or the other has some sorrow, some grief, some confusion. A gentleman in London started saying, “There is a fierce
war ongoing in Vietnam, what are you talking about?” I replied, “Are you going to Vietnam? Are you the Prime Minister? Why are
you so bothered? You watch your inner Self.”
We shouldn’t fill our lives with small, trivial problems. Your eye can get damaged even if a small speck goes in your eye. This is
not significant. Be peaceful, because the time has come when the Kingdom of God is going to established on this earth. Be
content.
Sahaja yogis should be more peaceful than other people. They must be full of satisfaction and fill the whole world with their joy.
Sahaja Yoga will demonstrate the innate miracles. A forceful churn is going on, shake-up is going on.
Some of you here are new people who have come, some are quite old. Some new people easily reach great levels while some
older ones are still sitting here.
The one who has faith in the limitless grace of God Almighty [Paramatma], knows that He is the creator of the entire universe
and it is He who helps us sail through, such a person achieves realization in Sahaja Yoga instantaneously and establishes
himself. And once he settles down, he never regresses.
Strengthen your faith because such a thing is flowing through your hands. You have witnessed its miracles. Believe in yourself.
Know yourself. A lot more is happening. I have seen many children, small children, being born, they are actually those great
saints, your fathers and forefathers who are taking rebirth to help you all. Within 10 to 12 years, many great people will come in
this world. Preparations are going on for their welcome. They were hung on a cross; they were beaten. They are all going to take
rebirth now.
A new era will dawn upon this world. There is a small waiting time now. Have faith in God. The essence, blessings and hope of all
the religions is that man will get connected to God and become the truth.
Now, we will go into meditation for some time. There isn’t anything to do. Within you the seed which is in a dormant state, will
flourish. Close your eyes and witness your thoughts. People who are unwell, in physical pain, tormented because of lack of the
blessings of the Goddess Lakshmi [financial problems] and other types of problems, they all will get solutions to all their
problems. However, feeling of the real (unclear) is most important.

Everyone should place their hands like this in front of me. All that is dead from the past, your knowledge, sorrows, troubles and
all the plans about the future, hopes, disappointments, and all worldly things that are troubling you, leave them now at this
moment, and get awakened. Only by being in the present, will this fourth dimension open. It is not in the future or the past, that’s
why you should get it at this moment. Only this moment is important, and as you are sitting down now, you have to make this
jump and progress further. To get awakened in this moment, is Sahaja yoga, is spontaneous salvation.
Don’t move and with your eyes closed take your attention to your forehead, to your Sahasrara. Take your attention to where the
fontanelle bone area is. Don’t force it. With ease, just think about what’s happening on the top. Like sitting down here, you think
about the matters of your home peacefully. And slowly in your hands, is possible that some of you might feel little heat. You can
shake your hands if you are feeling heat. If there is no heat, then keep your hands straight like this, and you will feel that there is a
cool breeze coming from inside. If you take your attention to the forehead, you will see that there are no thoughts. This is
thoughtlessness, you will become thoughtless.
Just sit with complete peace from within. Tell you mind that, "You are trying to tell me many things and don’t try to trick me. I
want to go there." This mind that is tricking you, is testing you, you ask it to stop.
Sahaja Yoga works in collectivity, it’s not for one person, it’s not individual. You all are the pores of one collective being [Virat]. It
doesn’t depend on one person. You will know that you are the parts of one body. You are not alone in collective consciousness
[Samuhik Chetna]. You are all part and parcel of the same body. There isn’t the other. You will feel that everyone is our own.
People who have come for the first time and haven’t been here before, please stay seated. Those who have been here before,
have had their realisation and understand, they can get up slowly and move to the back one by one and stand at the back and
look after others. Please don’t disturb others, move slowly to the back. Those who have just come, please stay seated with eyes
closed.
The new people who can feel vibrations on their hands, who can feel something flowing through their hands, please raise your
hand.
[Hindi to English Translation v2]
1975-01-23 Seminar Mumbai, (Hindi) [Translation]
Just like a gardener cultivates a garden, and nurtures it with love, and then he watches out for the blooming flowers in the
garden. The joy the gardener feels upon seeing those flowers is inexplicable. The name “Krishna” is derived , from Krishi, Krishi –
you know is agriculture. During Shri Krishna’s time it was primarily agriculture, and, during Christ’s time it was irrigated with his
blood. The fertile land of This world has been adorned by so many incarnations before. Today, in this age of Kaliyuga, the time
has come when we can witness the blossoming of that farming, to breathe in the fragrance of those flowers.
These vibrations (Chaitanya Lehriyān) flowing from your hands is the same fragrance, because of which the entire world, the
entire creation and the entire nature is functioning. But, today you are those chosen flowers, chosen over the ages, to blossom
so that today your vibrations and your fragrance should spread across the world, cleanse its sludge and eliminate the filth of this
ocean of illusion (Maya Sagar). When looking at it, one may wonder how it is possible? Mataji is making a big statement. But, this
is a continuous process (Silsila), and, when the destination has arrived in front you, then thinking why it has arrived? How has it
come? How can this happen? When you were walking, did the destination not arrive? When you were seeking, will you not get
your place? But, when you have got it, why should there be any doubts about it?
Today, I want to tell you about three powers that the Almighty is one. He is not two or many. I am just one. I am not many. But, I
am your Mataji, my husband’s wife, my kids’ mother, I am your heavenly mother, their worldly mother. Similarly, even the

Almighty has three forms, three aspects. In the first aspect, He is the Witness Form (Sakshi Swaroop). He is the Witness to His
play of his power, shakti , that He watches. We call Him Ishwar. We call His power – Ishwareeya Shakti or Ishwari. In our Sahaja
Yoga, we call this, the power of Mahakali. The moment when this witness form of His comes to an end, meaning when He
doesn’t want to see anything else, He dislikes something, He shuts His eyes to the play of his /shakti, at that time, everything
comes to an end. That is why we call it, as the power of destruction (Sanhārak Shakti). In reality, it is not destructive (Sanhārak).
But, it actually does all the organisation work for the whole of the world’s affairs and ends it too.
The second power that the Almighty utilizes is His Trigunātmika Shakti, with which he creates the whole world. All the huge
planets, stars are created and an immensely pure Earth is created in this manner. In this state, the Almighty is known as
Hiranyagarbha and His wife is Hiranyagarbhini. In our Sahaja Yoga, we call this Mahasaraswati.
The third power of the Almighty is the Virāta form, the power of Virāta because of which creatures are born in this world. They
achieve their evolution. Animals evolve into humans and humans (Mānav) evolve into superhumans (Ati mānav), and the super
humans evolve into the Almighty (Parmātma). This power of Viraat is known as Mahalakshmi in Sahaja Yoga.
In this way, there are three powers of the Almighty that spread His splendour. The first power is known as Ishwari Shakti, the
second is Hiranyagarbhini, and the third is Viraatangna. Sahaja Yoga work is the work of Viraat. The Almighty has bestowed all
the three powers in humans too. With one power, whatever is dead, man collects. This is the power of Mahakali. With another
power, man does all the future planning, thinking or reflection- this is the power of Mahasaraswati. The power with which he
achieves his evolution is the power of Mahalakshmi. All these three powers integrate in the body of the Viraat, in his Sahasrara.
He is the Adi Purush (Primordial man). The Almighty has made all the arrangements to create human beings in his own image.
The Mahalakshmi power ensures Her work is well organized for living beings. She makes so many selections, makes several
choices and ascends the deserving people, deserving animals to a certain level of evolution(unclear). But, a human being gets
complete freedom to achieve that state so that in his consciousness, in his awareness, he can seek his evolution and know how
he has achieved his evolution. An animal can’t think about its evolution, but a human can think about it, can see it, and can know
it too, when these vibrations start flowing through his hands.
The destination has arrived. You all have reached the courtyard. How easy and Sahaja is all this, but humans have really
complicated themselves, too much. It becomes very difficult for a human being to live with simplicity and innocence. Religion is
nothing else but simplicity and innocence. But when so many brains are involved, how can we talk of innocence? That is why
many small children attain realization very easily because they are innocent.
Many things are happening in kaliyuga that you probably aren’t aware of. As soon as the power of Virāta is strengthened , at the
same time the powers of many people who were downgraded to hell (Pātāl) like waste materials whom we say ‘rakshasas’, grow
remarkably too. Both the powers are competing against each other. One power is dead and the other is living. The dead energy
can never be stronger than the living power. However, the living power is very sensitive . For this reason, it is difficult for it to
flourish. A plastic flower can never be more beautiful or more important than a real flower. Thousands of plastic flowers can be
made, but just one or two natural flowers bloom. That is why those who have thrived in Sahaja Yoga, who have achieved in
Sahaja Yoga, they also wither, then thrive again, and then again wither. Like a mother nurtures her child with utmost care and
love, likewise, Sahaja Yoga nurtures and nourishes. But the child also has a power by which it must recognize its powers.
Through Sahaja Yoga man can attain the highest state in a short span of time, for which the great saints and sages had to take
thousands of births and had to do austere penance for thousands of years, and meditate for ages. We are extremely fortunate
that we are born in this special era. We are normal people born for unusual work. This unusual force is working from behind the
curtain , helping you. The ordinary people have been chosen by Virata to reside in His Sahasrāra, because the ordinary has the
power, not the extraordinary . In Sahaja Yoga the foremost thing is that there should be innocence and peace within. Peace is
satisfaction. Someone or the other has some sorrow, some grief, some confusion. A gentleman in London started saying, “there
is a fierce war ongoing in Vietnam, what are you talking about?” I replied, “are you going to Vietnam? Are you the Prime Minister?
Why are you so bothered? You watch your inner self.” We shouldn’t fill our lives with small, trivial problems. Your eye can get
damaged even if a small speck goes in your eye. . This is not significant. Be peaceful, because the time has come when the

kingdom of God is going to be established on this earth. Be content. Sahaja yogis should be more peaceful than other people.
They must be full of satisfaction and fill the whole world with their joy. Sahaja Yoga will demonstrate the innate miracles. A
forceful churn is going on, shake-up is going on.
Some of you here are new people who have come, some are quite old. Some new people easily reach great levels while some
older ones are still sitting here. The one who has faith in the limitless grace of God Almighty (Paramatma), knows that He is the
creator of the entire universe and it is He who helps us sail through, such a person achieves realization in Sahaja Yoga
instantaneously and establishes himself. And once he settles down, he never regresses. Strengthen your faith because such a
thing is flowing through your hands. You have witnessed its miracles. Believe in yourself. Know yourself. A lot more is
happening. I have seen many children, small children, being born. They are actually those great saints, your fathers and
forefathers who are taking rebirth to help you all. Within 10 to 12 years, many great people will come in this world. Preparations
are going on for their welcome. They were hung on a cross, they were beaten. They are all going to take rebirth now. A new era
will dawn upon this world. There is a small waiting time now. Have faith in God. The essence, blessings and hope of all the
religions is that man will get connected to God and become the truth.
Now, we will go into meditation for some time. There isn’t anything to do. Within you the seed which is in a dormant state, will
flourish.

1975-0122, Innocence and the fortress of thoughtlessness
View online.
22 January 1975
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Marathi | Translation (Hindi to English) - VERIFIED, Translation (Marathi to English) - VERIFIED
Talk, Bholepana ani nirvicharitecha killa
[Marathi to English Translation]
Yesterday, at the Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan, I spoke to you about the 3 powers of the God Almighty. Many people who were present
said that a lot of things that were told went over their heads. [They couldn’t understand a lot of what Mother was saying.] So, it is
best that I tell you only the things that go through the heart. It is true that the brain cannot comprehend such things. The people
who claim to be scientists, educated, learned are not able to absorb (the knowledge) about Sahaja yoga. I have seen many such
cases. And then there are everyday average people – the ones who are not educated, who sometimes don’t even have means to
eat, wear clothes – those people easily imbibe Sahaja yoga.
You cannot realise God through education. Although if I say this, all the big shots in the education industry would come after me!
You may be able to understand how the material world works through education. But to grasp the workings of the Divine you
need different ways, different qualities. Out of them, the most important one is the quality of ‘Bholepana’ – which translates to
‘innocence’ in English. Small children have innocence in them. Although you will find a few grown-ups who are also very
innocent. They get cheated, people take advantage of their innocence and trouble them a lot. They get tortured a lot too. This is
why all the saints have suffered at the hands of people in this world, and they still do. That makes me feel sad at times. All of you
who have got the Realization are saints. Not only saints but you have become the members of the divine kingdom. You are now
in the same place as the gods. The same godly people. These are the same gods whose description we have read about in the
Puranas [ancient Indian scriptures].
These Gods have now been awakened inside of you all. The divinity aspect is enlightened within you. So, in such a state (of
yours) it is obvious that the bhoots [evils] will wander around you and trouble you. Let them. They can only trouble you to a
certain extent; until they reach their limits. Their powers are restricted only in the three dimensions of this world. Means only
limited to worldly matters. At the most they may harm you physically. Let them. The human body is mortal. You may be harmed
emotionally. Let it be. But I have offered you and shown you a fort (Balekilla* – She refers to a fort of Shivaji where he used to
take refuge to be safe from the enemy). I have shown you this inside yourselves. That is the fort of Nirvichar state, thoughtless
awareness. Always remember that no one will dare to step in if you establish yourself inside that fort. But you must form a habit
of making yourself sit inside it.
Shri Krishna is called as Ranchhod-das [the one who runs away from the battlefield]. Ranchhod-das meaning nothing else but the
one escaping all the bombardments of negativities and taking refuge in his own fort. That is why he is called Ranchhod-das. And
the negativities stay stunned and helpless outside! We are aware that there exists a lot of black magic. We know that ill minded
people are practicing all sorts of dark arts. I am also aware that they are troubling you. They tortureyou. But how far can they
trouble you? You should be able to challenge all those negativities to come and try attacking you in that fort of yours (of
thoughtless awareness). So, you should never forget about this fort of yours. This circle of protection had never been granted to
humans before. It has now been made available to you with great difficulties; the door has been opened, so go and take a place
inside. Then let me see which negativity has the nerve to trouble you or give you any disease or health problems! You need to
establish yourself inside that fort. Even if all your family members oppose you, you should be able to keep your state within
saying ‘do what you want, I will stick to my state within’! Even if the whole society goes against you, you should be able to sustain
yourself inside your fort. And at last, even if the entire world opposes you, and if you establish your foothold inside that fort, who

can enter it?
And the day someone enters your fort, he also receives his self-realization. This miracle/magic is in our hands, so pull others
inside your fort. Let them see! Then with whom they will fight, for they will understand that we are all one. All these negative
people who are wandering around, they are digging their own graves. And this time, if they fall in their grave, into that hell, (I) will
not let them rise again. So be alert; there is no need to be scared. If you are all prepared, let us create that giant fortress together.
In this Kali Yuga; no one has the daring to confront Me.
These are murderers who are attacking children from the back. So don’t pay attention there. Be assured that no harm can ever
be done to you, and you will always remain safe – but you need to stay in your shelter (of your fort) and not to fall into their trap.
Some such (negative) people are in Dadar [an area in Mumbai, India]. The black/dark art which these false gurus are spreading,
have destroyed many homes so far and I know about it. I had warned you already before. Only two of them have left Dadar, but
others are still out there. They are not for the welfare of people but to make money for themselves. They can surely earn money,
everyone does that. But they are doing this in the name of God. There can be pardon for making money in the name of Go., But it
is unpardonable when they are spreading bhoots [preaching negativity] in the name of God. God will never forgive such people. In
the early days, the bhoots were real bhoots. But now these are people selling bhoots in the name of God! They put these bands
and strings (supposed to help) around the wrists of people and send the bhoots through those in their houses. These kinds of
businesses are going on rampantly. I was amazed to see these sorts of businesses going on in London on such a scale and I
was wondering whether this is London or Bhoot-nagari: the city of bhoots!
As soon as you touch the grounds of London, the bhoots are swarming everywhere! Wherever you see, it is just devil worship.
They are everywhere where Christ had warned against following the path of such bhoots. Warned against doing such work for
devils – those same Christians, are now scavenging the graveyards for blood and ashes and are practicing these dark arts. They
are doing planchettes! Means they are doing exactly what was forbidden. Christ had spoken about it and so had Nanak Saheb.
No one else had spoken about it so avowedly about this devil worship. And now all these Christians – who used to rule over India
as British – have now been possessed by these people. The streets and alleys of London are rampant with businesses
producing these bhoots. And now what has happened to their wisdom! When I speak out against them, the people don’t accept
it. The only difference is the people out here in India sell it under the name of God while people out there sell it as it is: they call it
the art of Satan, or they call it witchcraft, etc. There is no falsehood there like we have in India. But those arts have been
‘exported’ there from India. Many are exported there! All those big false gurus who went there from India have now become so
rich, that each one has 35 odd Rolls Royces [luxury cars]. One Rolls Royce costs around 10,000,000 Rs (in 1975). This is what the
situation is in England. And it is no better in India. You need to first decide if you want Dharma or adharma? If you want Dharma,
then you need to stand on truth. For those who are looking for untruth, I don’t have it. I don’t have chamatkars [magic tricks], I
won’t pull out a ring to give you if you want those sorts of things. I have meditation. I want to teach you the art of unlocking this
great treasure, this great potential power placed inside of you by the Divine. I want to ask all these false gurus who are doing
such gimmicks like giving out rings, “They should solve all the problems of India! They should be made Prime minister. They will
give the rings to everyone! Why do they entertain only the rich? Distribute to the needy, there are lots of poor people. They do not
pay attention to the poor at all. All their attention is on the pockets of the rich and the rich are stupid enough to go to such
people. Such is the state of affairs.
You are not aware of the fact that these bhoots are the cause of such a miserable state of this country. So never help such
people for even a slight gain or never stand at their doorstep to seek any help. If anyone speaks about bhoots, please do not go
to them. Everything is in Dharma. All the things in this world including wealth and even much beyond, all of them are
encompassed by the Dharma. Everything is Dharma. All of it is created by Dharma alone. There is nothing that exists beyond
Dharma. And that what exists beyond cannot be described to you. If you want to suffer for 7 generations in hell or if you want to
get out of the cycle of human birth and step into the birth cycle of insects, only then you may walk on the path of this bhoot
vidya. You must speak openly about it. That all these games of magic should be brought to a stop. All these false magical
gimmicks should be stopped. And you shouldn’t be scared to do that. The real magic within should manifest, the light within
should shine. And the flowers blooming in that joy should spread their perfume everywhere so that this mud of dirt gets
transformed into a lake of lotuses. That time has come.

The entire universe is ready for that time. The five elements are awaiting to help you out. All the great incarnations are showering
blessings upon you to carry out this great task. Everyone is fully prepared to help you out in every possible way. It is now up to
the humans to make a decision. They must choose whether we are following Dharma or Adharma. Are we supporting Dharma or
Adharma?” It is not possible to buy the Dharma. Those who have made a business out of God, those who have made a mockery
of Dharma by fooling and cheating the innocent, all those who have created this tragic irony of Dharma, all of them will have to
suffer for their sins. But the biggest sin of all is to torture the saints. There is no greater sin than distracting the seekers from
their path to seek God. And the punishment for that sin is so horrific that it cannot be described.
So never ever should anyone take to such evil work. The way Dharma is beautiful, guiding, loving, encompassing as well as
integrating everyone together, same way it is refulgent too. It is so radiant that it can also be destructive which can burn and
annihilate everything . Dharma has got the same powers as Agni [fire]. You better keep this in mind. This time, I am noticing even
more such things in Dadar (area in Mumbai).What kind of diseases and what kind of troubles , today we are giving to our own
mothers , sisters and children ;It is only us troubling our own people; no one else. Animals do not trouble humans. The humans
are harming their fellow human beings. They are the ones slitting each other’s throats, no one else. And the reason this is
happening is because the rakshasas [demons] have entered into the humans. And at same time a bhakta (devotee) also resides
in the human.
The demons only wish to slit the devotee’s throat. If they don’t do it, they wouldn’t be rakshasas! But the situation is worse as the
rakshasas have entered into each of the saints as well.Now What can I do? The one who I have made my son – the rakshasa
also entered inside.Now what can I do ? I can’t slap this child, neither can I embrace him. What a helpless situation for a Mother!
The Mother has come to visit the child, but the child is hosting a bhoot in his head. Now what can I do? Throw away all those
rakshasas who are sitting on your heads! Why are you carrying them with all that pride? What good have they ever done to you?
There is scarcity of food, scarcity of water…. the mother earth is helpless in front of you, the sun is also frustrated and the sea
has thrown his hands in the air because of this stupidity of humans.
The people troubling the saints should keep this in their minds – if you trouble a saint for a few pennies, you will be answerable
for it, not only in this lifetime, but many births after this. I know that there are few people who have settled in this society (In
general) who are making money in the wrong way. Know that they are here to trouble.keep this in mind ! Know that I am the
mother of those rakshasas as well, as I am yours. But to protect you, I have killed them many times and will be killing them. So
do not worry. Even if they are my children, I will still kill them. Let them see. Hopefully some of them will ascend and become
humans, then we will see. But don’t you fall for their games and illusions.We cannot fill our stomachs with lies . As it is, the
nation is in ruins – but don’t ruin the future of coming generations. Great souls are taking births in these times. Do not create hell
for them but make some special arrangements for them, create something beautiful to welcome them on this earth. What have
you done here for your children? I am standing here. Ask for anything and I will give you. But from where can I bring wisdom?
From where can we borrow the wisdom for you? You have to get your wisdom. It is the only thing I am asking you to get, I am
ready to do the rest of the hard work. That seed (of wisdom) lies within you. It is absolutely true that the seed lies inside you.
‘Vaalya’ transformed into ‘Vaalmiki’. The (power) thing by which he got transformed, is also within you. He didn’t necessarily
want to become Vaalmiki, nor did he have that much wisdom. The day he realized that he is killing his soul through his acts for
little money, he decided that day only. He thought, “for whom I was doing it? I have done so much; what have I done for myself?”
Think this way once and see what you have done for yourself. I yearn for you and my soul yearns for you every moment..( I am
concerned ). I want to light the lamp inside you all – the light which will spread all over the world. You will be surprised but it is
going to be this country itself – India – that is going to become the light of the world. Don’t be scared. It is only a matter of time.
Let this time pass. It is you all from this country, who are going to sit on top of the vibrations one day,bear this in mind . And there
is only one reason for that. We agree everything is messed up in this country – but we still haven’t learnt to disrespect our
mothers, we still haven’t lost that morality. And until this situation changes, the position of this country [in the Kingdom of God] is
not going to ever change.

This is Yoga Bhumi – land of Yoga; this is Bhog Bhumi – land of experience. You are not to decide on this. It has already been
decided by the Gods. And why do the people born in this country consider themselves inferior only because of scarcity of food?
Only you people can live like this, not the people in London. They start crying even for something as small as the collar of the
shirt being long or short. You are the true Sanyasis as you can sleep anywhere, can eat whatever and are still happy in
everything.You have the blessings of your Mother.
So, if you want to disrespect your Mother, go ahead and do it and then be ready for the consequences! This is true that one can
be angry or upset with Mother, but it is also a fact that the highest relationship in humans is the one with Mother and that one
can see(get darshan) God almighty in Her only. And only the mothers of this country have the capacity to bear so much. Other
places, they ask the children to leave the house at a very young age .And if the children do not help in the chores, they are asked
to pay for their food, such are the mothers outside (India). The child can die, but the old mother (as old as 90 years) doesn’t want
to spend any money as she needs that for her lipstick. And see how you honor your Mother. Only here such mothers take birth;
nowhere in the world you would find a mother like in India. You can go round and see that- But you have tortured her so much.
Dharma will be lost in this case. Do not disrespect dharma. Stop all or any plans of humiliating your Mother. Return the money. I
know everything. Don’t think that I don’t know you!
[Shri Mataji turns soft again.] Anyways, whatever it is, right now – in this lifetime, now..you need to get your realization. Let’s eat
the laadoos [sweets] first and then we will sort out the rest. What else can make the Mother happy? Mother has prepared such
nice food for you all and then she has to scold you! But I have to do it sometimes. So now relax and sit down to eat. Eat your food
in a relaxed mood. And take the amrut [nectar], acquire the amrut. Let this amrut in the form of love, flow through you into the
entire world. Here we are set on changing the course of this world – and you are still involved with these petty nuisances. All
these things are going to be recorded in the history of this world – keep that in mind, all the people who have committed such
stupidities. Each name will be remembered, and people will spit upon them. Not only their children but generations will be
blamed for those wrongdoings. So, these were the dirty people who did these dirty deeds!!! Do the work which will be considered
bright! Enlighten yourself. That is what the Mother wants to give to her children. Go into meditation – close your eyes.
[Shri Mataji is speaking in Hindi]
The talk I had to give today, it had to be in Marathi. You see,without Marathi you cannot get the same fun , I can’t manage to do
the same in Hindi. I can manage only in Marathi! So, forgive me if I didn’t speak in Hindi. Forgive me again as I had to tell some
things to some specific people – it was not meant for you.
[Shri Mataji again speaking in Marathi] [Someone in the audience asks a question referring to some guru.] Don’t say names. At
least, for the time being, do not blame. Many people are lost. People have gone to many different (so called) gurus. What is a
guru, who is a Guru, who is not; who is Guru, who is animal – how to recognize it – one feels it inside. You can recognize it
through vibrations. The vibrations flowing from your hand can tell you who the real guru is and who is not. So first learn how to
get that awareness and then decide who a real guru is. Why are you making anyone a guru before like mad men?
Get the eyes to see the real guru. Until then keep all the gurus aside. Keep them away. For now, you are your own guru, and I am
your Mother.

1975-0125, Talk to Sahaja Yogis: I can’t think of anything other than Sahaja Yoga
View online.
25 January 1975
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
Talk to yogis (Hindi). Mumbay (India), 25 January 1975.
[English Translation from Hindi Version 1]
Sahaja has been created for you only. But for mankind to understand Sahaja Yoga is not so easy. Because if some very great
thing is obtained effortlessly, a lacking remains for its importance, its measure, faith and devotion for that Shakti, to absorb it
with complete attention within through hard work. That’s why you see that mostly Sahaja Yogis are very casual. But those other
Swamis, as you know, how they put people into meditation, and how they take advantage of them. Those who take money from
you, make you work hard and make you stand on your heads, make you exercise, etc.
So your ego gets satisfied with it and you get stuck to it. You must have seen such people who have given their all, their money,
etc and then sweep the floors for these Sadhus. The getting of Sahaja Yoga is done so effortlessly [sahaja] that people remain
casual towards it. Like we got our eye so effortlessly, so we are so casual about it. We have no value that this eye is so precious.
But the day we get a slight pain in the eye then we realize, “O God!" That is why it is so necessary to get badhas. If there are no
badhas then Sahaja Yogis will never bother.
(A person in the audience asks about badhas. Shri Mataji answers.) Badha is dependent on you. Till you catch, there is badha.
What to do? There are some people who have got Realisation and they have gone beyond. Badha doesn’t catch them. They never
get caught up. Because there are a lot of merits [Punyas] from their past lives. But they should also be alert. They should not
forget that, "We do not catch so we are something special", doesn’t matter.
To be casual towards Sahaja Yoga will cost us dearly! If you are casual towards your eye then it does not matter because there is
someone ready to look after your eyes, hands, feet, body. You don’t have to look after that. But you have to look after your Sahaja
Yoga. There is a lot of difference between the two. Someone will look after your body, and all that is three dimensional will be
looked after, but you yourself have to see to Sahaja Yoga. We have to grow in it, but we are so casual that even if a person is
sitting in our neighbourhood we will not talk about it. Whoever you meet, talk about it. You will have to give this dedication about
Sahaja Yoga. There are many people who… Their bodies are separate.
Like yesterday, one girl had a badha, and when her brother came he got his Realisation . In this world there are many parts of you
all over, whom you have to gather. This is also a very big Sahaja Yoga. Even in your own house how can someone live without
Sahaja Yoga, “If you live in my house then you all will have to come to Sahaja Yoga. You will have to get Realisation and keep no
badha.” There should be an insistence but there is no need to get angry. You must tell them. This casualness will not do. Sahaja
Yoga will have to be established with eating, waking, with every breath being taken. Because if you think of yourself as
something special, if you think that your body is a temple and there is something special about it then the voice of the Temple
bells must keep ringing. Otherwise it will go to waste. Sahaja Yoga can also go to waste. Please understand this!
Also the second thing I better tell you that without Sahaja Yoga you now have no personality. Without it you have no blossoming.
Without that you have no place. Because when you have come to the Kingdom of God you will have to take its citizenship.
Yesterday one family member came and he said that, Yesterday I went to Gajanan Maharaj." "Who is this Gajanan Maharaj?" I
saw that Agnya Chakra, Vishuddhi chakra, three chakras were catching. He said that he catches with the photo of Gajanan

Maharaj. I said, "Here I am your sister sitting in your own house and why did you go to Gajanan Maharaj?" First he said, “No, he is
a saint.” I said, “At least check the vibrations that he is a saint or not?” They just went casually. They should also see, "Is this
Sahaja Yoga?" After becoming a king then wanting to become a beggar, such people should be thrown out! But they said they did
not become beggars deliberately. It was in casualness that they went off there, "What to do, our wife is like this, what could we
do?” "What could we do our father is like that." "Our daughter said, 'Let's go' so we went..” So then they came and said, “Mataji,
my Agnya Chakra got caught. My stomach chakra got caught.” Three chakras of theirs got caught yesterday. "I am your real
sister sitting here then what was the need for you to go to Gajanan Maharaj?" Then they said, ”Our state has gone really bad so
now we will go to Sai Baba." So I told them that, "You better come here and then go to Sai Baba otherwise the same will happen
there. What wisdom will you gain there? Thousands go there, so what is it you want there? You want material things from Sai
Baba? Will these desires of human beings get fulfilled? You have got all materially. Now what is it you are wanting? You have got
kingdoms, palaces now what do you want?"
The one who has come to give, and what you have to get, is of great importance for humanity. God has made you with great
care. All this filth which you have collected in your brain, just throw it all away! You have collected all these useless things, all this
junk in this temple of yourself. Establish this temple. In every heart you have to light lamps. Purify your house, purify your family,
and purify your society. You are very concerned about your relatives. Your mother in law has come, "I have to do for her; I have to
give her." What will your mother-in-law give you? She will beat you with shoes! You must know that your relatives are the Sahaja
Yogis. There are no other relatives besides Sahaja Yogis. Sahaja Yogis are the relatives of Sahaja Yogis, because they speak
another language, their ways are different; their manner is different. For this you will have to burn your life force [Prana]. For this
you will have to share Love. Love will flow on the edge of your Attention [Chitta]. First make your Attention alright. Make it light. If
you keep everything else on your attention how will Sahaja Yoga come? It is coming down through your Attention, [Chitta] only.
God is waiting to pour this into you, but where is your attention? In two minutes your attention runs here and there. Just put your
attention at God’s feet. He does not want your money, wealth or anything else. Keep this all with you. This is the stupidity of
humans. And which you have gathered, what is the importance of all this? Give importance to your attention because it is on this
attention that God will come. He has made you young like 20-year olds. Your bodies have healed; He has made your hearts Pure.
Collective Consciousness has come into you. Now what? You are still running after this or the other. You consider all those
things more important. In your past lives you had earned all this rubbish and left it all behind. Now again you will collect all this
wealth and you will again leave it all behind. To live casually for a Sahaja Yogi is a very dangerous thing. What we call as
carelessness. There is a great war going on. You know how other ways and methods have got started for destruction.
Sahaja Yoga is like a lotus standing in these murky waters. Delicate, Fragrant, Beautiful, and you are the petals of that lotus. Any
filth which falls on you will just slide off when you get to know that you are lotuses. So if any chakra is catching then get rid of
the filth. You are lotuses; you have been made into lotuses so if any filth falls onto the lotus then the lotus should just throw it
off. Each one of you will have to be awakened towards Sahaja Yoga if you have to take the boat of Sahaja Yoga across. Don’t sit
with your tiny and petty problems of your relatives, homes, and your small petty questions. Till when are you going to keep
hanging onto this filth? None of this lot is going to side with you, "Will my son or daughter get married?" Etc. If it happens fine and
if it doesn’t then fine also. You will spend money there, try and get a name there. And for Sahaja Yoga? You have no time for
Sahaja Yoga. The big thing is that people in India do not have too much money. Their own monetary condition is not too good.
But we must know that in this India there are VIBRATIONS which control everything. Any other country would have collapsed by
now. You are living because of the support of vibrations. What a great country this is! What a country you are born in! You know
this. I don’t know how to tell the foreigners about the importance of the Devi. They don’t know what is the Devi, what is the
Mother. They are such dirty people who don’t understand the relationship of the Mother, I feel like crying. And you people have
become so casual. Like you shave your beard, you meditate in the same way. How is this going to happen?
My brothers tell me, “Why are you killing yourself from morning to evening? Something might go wrong with your health, and then
what will your husband tell us? You sleep at 4-5 am, day long you are working so hard, why are you doing this, what are you going
to get by this?” I can fight alone but what benefits are you all going to get by it? To be casual, to live casually, it is a dismal
attitude towards yourself. It is your own insult. It is like a king who has got all the wealth and he is living casually. There are rules
to ascend the throne! Are you going to finish off Sahaja Yoga by taking up petty little things?! Clean your insides; clean your
heart. Leave this cunningness and clean your heart and see if we are sitting in innocence. You are doing me no favour. What you

were seeking from lifetimes you are getting that only. Now that you have, come to the last stage. Then what is this crazy
behaviour? You may not have seen the one who has come to the last stage, but I have seen many like that. First I have to get
them stuck to it. Stick! Stick! Stick!
Sometimes you have such thoughts that, ”What can we do? Our country is so bad, and we are so poor here. And what good can
we do to our country?” Good that you don’t have money. I have given realization to so many people who are rich. Where are they?
Just two or three! And they too are such misers. There is no one here with too much money. I have given Realisation to people
with lakhs and crores. What are they doing? Good there is not so much money and its nuisance! Good that this money is not
stuck to you. You have less money which is really good. I have seen these rich, so called, these ministers, they have no joy like
you people have. They got their Realisation and then just sat down very nicely! There they will sit with money! Big ministers,
secretaries have got Realisation! What have they done? God protect us from their egos! Who is a secretary or a king with God?
Answer this. Is Shri Mataji right?
It is such an important day. Who am I before you? Go where you go for your Pujas to these temples! Are they going to come on
this earth get your own temple ready? These little children who just came in are more lucky and blessed than you people. They
are beyond money, positions and all this foolishness. They just want Mataji. Yesterday some of these children had come and
they pleaded with their mothers to let them be at my program for a longer time. I was not giving them any chocolate or anything
like that but they wanted to sit more with Mataji. They understand more than you people. Leave your past and become like
children. You have become like children. What a beautiful form! You too were like this my children. You all were like this. Where
have you got lost and become disfigured? Be afraid of your ugliness. Look at the beauty of others. When I will go away, when the
Mother leaves then it is the duty of the children to look after the house. When I come back, I see that my children have been
spreading Sahaja Yoga. But here when I come, I see that 8-10 people have their Agnyas caught up, some others have their Nabhi
caught up and yet others have Vishuddhi caught up. Someone went to someone else [guru], while others have fallen sick,
someone is in bad shape, someone’s wife is in hospital and another has gone to the lunatic asylum. Oh, what happened? And
don't think you are small people. You are very great people. All these "big" people are of no use. They don’t get their Realisation!
Know your greatness and then talk. Open yourself and talk. One who speaks even one word in Sahaja Yoga, then Sakshat
Saraswati herself will come and sit there. I am telling you. Just speak and then see. Just start talking about Sahaja Yoga and you
will see Saraswati coming into your voice. Start writing about it and She will come into your writings. Take up any work in Sahaja
and Sakshat Hanuman is standing and he tells me, “Mother, with whom should I stand?” Hanumanji is doing all your work. Take
up any work in the name of your Mother, even of work of the world. For Sahaja Yoga the five Immortals [Chiranjeevs] are
standing there for you. All these deities are ready with their Shaktis standing in the background for you. And what do they see?
That the actor who has come is in very bad shape. He is looking here and there. How will the drama go on? This half-baked
attitude won’t do.
“Mataji, I don’t get time to sit for meditation.” What do you mean that you get no time? What is time meant for? Who has given
you this time? If you have no time for yourself then how will you get time for God? How do you get no time? You should wake up
at 4am. You have seen your Mother. How many hours does She sleep? Wake up at 4 in the morning. Tell yourself. You have to go
into meditation from 4 to 5 am. Throw away your sleep! Give up keeping awake in the night. Stop talking with useless people.
Stop these useless associations, these relatives, all these useless people. All these are bhoots. Have we come here to waste our
time on these people? I don’t spend even one moment on telling you about Sahaja Yoga. Not even one moment. I have to meet
thousands of people from my husband’s office with whom I have to shake hands at receptions; I use it for giving Realisation.
They shake hands and I give them Realisation. I see that he has got Realisation and I feel like laughing. Whichever country I go to
I keep giving Realisation. Whoever I speak to I keep giving Realisation. He keeps talking and I keep on giving Realisation. He goes
on talking about his own things. Where I get a chance I keep giving Realisation. On Victoria station a Pakistani Muslim was
collecting tickets. The line was very long and I was giving Realisation to him standing in the line and also to the people standing
in the line in front of me. Just as he gave me the ticket and looked at Me, he got his Realisation. He gave all their tickets and
came and sat in my compartment, where I'm sitting alone. He asked, ”Who are you? How do you have such an attraction?” I
asked who he was. He said he is Hussain. So I told him to sit down and put his hands towards Me. He says, ”What is this
happening? Cool? Who are You?” I said, “See and recognize.”

I went to Rome, where many artists were sitting and painting something. I gave one Realisation, then he got up and said
something to the one next to him, and then came and caught hold of my feet and started crying bitterly, saying, ”Mother, When
did You come?” I had gone there as the wife of a big officer with three or four official people standing beside me. They all got
embarrassed wondering what he is doing. He started saying, ”Mother, I have found You. In the night You had come in my dreams
and said that, 'I will wear such and such sari' and You have come in the same sari.”
Even a moment I think of nothing but Sahaja Yoga. I have forgotten all the past. I have had big births, big people. I have forgotten
all the past and future. In this moment I remember only Sahaja Yoga and nothing else. In the same way you people should think
of Sahaja Yoga only at each moment. Wherever you sit there should be Sahaja Yoga. Throw away your watches! Throw away this
servitude to watches! Sahaja Yoga is your watch. If it is 12:30 it does not matter. It is 3 am. You are sitting in Sahaja Yoga. Is
Sahaja Yoga the servant of a watch or time? We are not servants of any laws or rituals. We are standing only in Sahaja Yoga. We
keep sitting even if it takes time. Are we some servants of our stomachs? We are servants of no one. Everything keeps
happening. It has to happen. Throw away this servitude to all your old bindings! Throw away your watches! There is no system
made for anything. In Sahaja Yoga there can never be a system. It makes its own system. Let it be made. If you try and make
systems then it will be destroyed. Don’t make disciplines. Let the discipline of Sahaja Yoga keep moving within you. Yes for
those who have not got their realization for them the discipline is important. You do that. But those who have got realization
such people have to get their own discipline inside. The discipline will come by itself within. Sahaja Yogis have an inbuilt
discipline. There is no forgiveness for this. The one who is not a Sahaja Yogi should be forgiven because he does not understand
what discipline is. He only knows the worldly discipline of the stick. Let the discipline come from within and awaken from within
for Sahaja Yogis. See how much you are moving in the discipline of Sahaja. You are moving with its hand and feet and rising with
its waves. How much is the discipline tied with the waves of an ocean? You can tell sitting here at what time low tide or high tide
will come in London; who has tied its discipline; that you have started tying other’s discipline! Learn to step into the discipline of
the within. Learn to move in the directions and methods of within. Its methods are moving. Don’t make your own. Make your own
this, that. Let's get more into Sahaja, spend time for Sahaja. If you have to wear watches then wear it for Sahaja Yoga. If you have
to put alarm then let it be for Sahaja Yoga.
(To a person who just entered: Come and sit.) You are all within my heart. Are you far away? You must understand this.
Even one leaf in this world cannot move without His discipline. Blend yourself in His discipline and merge in with His harmony.
Harmonize yourself totally. When it rises you rise, when it falls you fall. When we try to do our own thing then we are left behind.
Keep molding yourself with it. This can happen only through Sahaja Yoga and not through any worldly things.
There is only one way, which I have said a thousand times and I am saying again, that your fortress is Thoughtlessness
[Nirvicharita]! Know in Thoughtless Awareness and you will know everything. Anything you have to do, go into Thoughtlessness.
Once you do all worldly works in thoughtless awareness then you will know that how dynamic it has become. Who has seen
flowers bloom or become fruits? Who has seen the living work of this world? It is being done. You are moving in the dynamism
and in this living thing. It is coming from thoughtlessness. When you sit there the whole world becomes pale. Try to make a habit
of remaining in Thoughtlessness. Every work is done through thoughtlessness and so will yours. Your movement within has to
be done by you. There is no age limit for this, that we have become old. You are not old. You have been reborn hardly 3-4 years
ago. You are just small little children. It is not a question of age. One should remain in Thoughtlessness. This is your place, your
wealth, your strength [Shakti]. This is your form. This is your beauty. This is your life. Thoughtless! As soon as you are
thoughtless the outside methods, the whole of it starts moving in your hands. Live in thoughtlessness. Over there, there is no
Time, no Direction, nor can anyone touch it. There is only a vision of the Living. There is only a vision of Life and how it blooms.
There is vision of its Beauty, its Capability, its Prosperity and its Truth. Watch it from where the stream of life is flowing.
But when you become brainless, or extremely stupid, then how will It show you? Or to be heartless, without love, selfish, self
centered, to be ugly, to do atrocities, to keep on thinking about yourself, to think that you are something very great, then how will
It show you the way? In the movement of Sahaja Yoga there should be such beauty. While doing it there should be tremendous
faith. When raising the Kundalini there should be so much Devotion that it is like you are praying to the Kundalini or Mother of
another. There should be great respect for that state, so much thought about it. In everything, in your behaviour, your talk, the

way you talk, in your touch, your laughter, and your tears, in everything there should be such a vision of your heart. It is massive.
This massiveness should show from within you. There should be a Vision of the Skies within you. The Purity of Water should
reflect from within you. The Brilliance of the Sun should show from your face, the Coolness of the Moon should flow from within
you. Flowing everywhere, you should be like the Wind. Your Breath is beating in everyone at this time. Know this! Don’t play with
your life. By being extremely reverent and humble just accept it, the new life the Divine is putting within us. May you accept His
Grace, His Love. You don’t need to bathe or wash your hands for it, you need to do nothing but clean your heart. Clean your heart,
“O God, please clean our hearts and make us leave our cunning and deceitful ways." Clean your hearts as He is going to descend
in the lotus of your hearts. Clean your hearts. Are our hearts clean? Who are you deceiving? To whom are you telling lies? You are
all one. I can never say to one person only. I am speaking to each one of you that you are all in one body; and that too in my body.
You are my projection. I am telling myself. To whom else shall I say? Who is the other?
When you are sick, I feel pain within just like I myself have got sick. And when you are happy then I feel tremendous joy just like I
have myself become happy. When you are unhappy then I too don’t enjoy any joy. I keep awake night and day for you.
Whatever or whichever way you can do, one must give time, give full time. Now we are going to make an ashram, so the ones
who have money can give money. You will have to give. You spend money here and there. Of what use has it been your spending
money here and there. I don’t need your money. I need nothing. I don’t need to spend anywhere. This ashram is being made for
you, your brothers and sisters, who are going to live there. Now these realized children are being born, they need a school and
someone who can look after them. Give money for that. How will the money come? Any money that comes from you is very
important. Such people come here who do not want to spend even one rupee. There are not such poor people here - if that is the
case then it is alright. But those who cannot give even one rupee can such people be Sahaja Yogis? I get really amazed that they
trouble for giving one rupee or five rupees! You will have to give in thousands. Who has given you this money? I don’t want it.
What can you give me? At least give for yourself, for your children, for your benefit. Tomorrow you yourself will come and live in
those ashrams. I know it. There is no need to be such misers or be freeloaders. Live like kings. Just like I don’t eat for free you
should also not eat for free.
Whoever can do, do. One who has time, give time. One who can work, then work. One who has to give realization, then give
realization. One has to take out the bhoots then take out the bhoots. Do for Sahaja Yoga. You will have to. Without doing so your
ego will not die, and neither will your super ego die unless and until you do not do something for Sahaja Yoga. Again your Agnya
will catch, “Mataji, my head is caught.” “Mataji my daughter ran away.” “Mataji, such and such happened to my father.” It will
happen. I don’t do anything. The Ganas don’t do anything. Wherever you have a weakness, there only the bhoots will catch you.
They don’t catch Me. Why don’t they catch Me?
"What has Mataji given us! She has given so much to someone else." Ach! He had to get so he got it. What you have got is no
less. You have no value for what you have got. There should be a satisfaction within. Catch hold of that Satisfaction. Stand in
that satisfaction. How can I tell you? There are also computers and points about this. Press the Satisfaction key and Satisfaction
gets awakened within. Press another key and your Innocence will awaken. Press another and Truth will awaken. This is all within
you. By pressing the fingers, the whole program can get set. But first at least there should be innocence. There should be some
satisfaction otherwise when you press the finger what will come out? Vacuum? One who has pressed Satisfaction has arrived at
Satisfaction. They have arrived at wealth. They are sitting in wealth. Some have collected your wealth from years by burning your
bodies for years and are now standing before you. In the same way you must collect things one by one: Satisfaction, come into
Innocence, come into Wealth, come into Beauty, come into Truth, come into Love. All the buttons are there.
How are we going to do it, how will we do it? There is no word like, "How will we...?" in Sahaja Yoga. Whatever you want to earn,
you can within yourself. You can earn satisfaction within yourself; you can earn everything within yourself. Press the button and
whatever you want will keep on coming to you. You will become a machine within. I can’t understand how to get that attainment
within you and join you.
Let us now go into Meditation.

[English Translation from Hindi Version 2]
Sahaja Yoga has emerged, but it is not so easy for a human to understand Sahaja Yoga. If you get a great thing like Sahaja Yoga
so easily, its greatness, its assessment, reverence for the shakti, devotion for the Shakti, the hard work required to fully integrate
it inside with full mind, all these things will be lacking. That is why you notice that many are very casual. But the other swamijis,
you know how they consider the people, and how they exploit them. They take money from you, make you do hard work, make
you stand on your head, make you do bodily work, some or other hard work so that your ego gets satisfied a little bit and you
stick to it. You may also have seen such people, who give away everything they have, like money, etc. to these swamijis and then
they sweep at Swamiji’s place. One gets Sahaja Yoga with such ease, they are casual towards it. Like they got their eyes so
easily, they are casual, they do not know the value of these eyes. But the day we have a problem with the eye, we will say ‘Oh,
God’. That is why one must have difficulties. If there is no difficulty, the Sahaja Yogi will not care for it at all. … Audience
talk..unclear.. How long difficulties will be there will depend on you, it will be there till you hold on to them, what can be done
about it?
There are some people, you know, once they are realised, they are realised; it will not touch them. They will never have
difficulties; it is due to the Punyas (good deeds) from their previous lives. They should also be alert. They should not be unduly
happy, ‘We do not have any difficulty, so we are special, no problem’. Being casual towards Sahaja Yoga will prove costly. If you
are casual towards yourself, there is no harm, because there is someone to look after your eyes, hands, legs, body-there is
someone to look after, ready. You don’t have to look after it. But your Sahaja Yoga, you have to look after yourselves. There is a
big difference between the two. All your body will be managed, whatever other things which, I call your three dimensions, will all
be managed. But your Sahaja Yoga, only you have to practice. You have to flow in that, but you are so casual, so casual, even if
someone is sitting next to you, you don’t tell him, meet him, talk about this and dedicate to Sahaja Yoga. There are many people
and different parts of the body – (alluding to the Sahaja Yogis)- are separated.
Yesterday a girl had a problem and her brother came, he got realisation in a split second. Lots of your limbs have fallen in this
world and you have to gather them, even that is a big Sahaja Yoga. In your own house, how can one be outside Sahaja Yoga? If
you are in my house, you have to come to Sahaja Yoga, get realisation and you should not have any problem. You should insist,
you should not get angry with them. You have to tell them about this, talk about this, but you should not be casual. Eat, rise, sit
and as you take a breath and with every breath, you have to propose Sahaja Yoga. Because, if you consider yourself a special
form, and if you think that there is something special about your temple, there should be ringing of bells all the time, otherwise it
will be a waste. Sahaja Yoga also can go waste. You understand this. Another thing I want to tell you is that without Sahaja Yoga,
you do not have a personality now. Without that there is no glow. Without that there is no acceptance. If you come into the
kingdom of God, you have to take citizenship!
I heard from many people, my brother came yesterday, he said’ ‘I went to Gajanand Maharaj’. I do not know who Gajanand
Maharaj is. Phadke talked about Gajanand Maharaj. Then, I saw that Agnya chakra, Vishuddhi chakra, and another chakra –
three chakras were caught up. He told his experience that he gets a catch from his photograph itself. Three chakras were caught
up. I said, ‘I am your sister sitting here and why did you go to Gajanand Maharaj?’ He said ‘All told me, he is a saint’. I said check
from Vibrations, whether he is a saint or not. He went casually. He should have checked. Is this Sahaja Yoga? After becoming a
King, one who becomes a beggar, he should be removed. But you are becoming a beggar knowingly. Went casually, went there
also. What to do, my wife is like this, what to do, my father is like this what to do, my daughter said let us go and I went. Then
what happened, After coming back, Mataji, my Agnya chakra is caught up, have a catch in the stomach, Nabhi chakra is caught
up, three chakras are caught up. I am your own sister sitting here, who asked you to go to Gajanand Maharaj? Then we thought
our condition was bad, so let us go to Saibaba. Then I said, first you come here, get the stomach fixed, then go to Saibaba. If you
go there also what wisdom will you get? Thousands go there, what happens there? What do you want to ask? Want to ask for
material things from Saibaba? When will man’s material desires be fulfilled? Everything is done, what do you want materially?
You have become a king, what do you still want? What I have come to give, what you have to get, that is very important.
For the human race, God has made a human after a lot of contemplation. There is so much dirt in your brains collected from here

and there, throw it away. You have collected a lot of useless things, junk. Throw away from this temple and make that temple
prestigious. Have to light a lamp in each and every heart. Purify your house, purify your family, purify your society. You care a lot
for your relatives! You have a lot of relatives. ‘I have come for them, my mother-in-law has come, I have to give her, I have to do
something for her. What will your mother-in-law give you, When you go, she will give you thrashing with footwear. These are your
relatives, Know that. You do not have any relatives, other than these. Only a Sahaja Yogi is the relative of a Sahaja Yogi because
they speak a distinct language. Their ways are different, their stride is different. You have to give your life. You have to share your
love. Love will flow on the edge of the mind, Correct your mind, make your mind light. If you keep so much in your mind, how will
Sahaja Yoga get in there? It is working on the mind, watch.
God is sitting to pour on you. But where is your attention? It keeps wavering every two minutes. You have to put your attention at
His feet, He does not want your money, etc. Keep it with you. What is the importance of all the collections made from deaths?
Make your attention important. God will descend on that mind. He has made you younger by ten to twenty years. Your body has
become alright. Thoughts of your mind have been purified. You have got collective consciousness. Now what?
Still, you are running after this and that. Do you attach more importance to that? In your previous lives, you have earned a lot of
dung. You have left it here and gone. Again gather it! You will again leave it here and go. It is very dangerous to be casual for a
Sahaja Yogi. This is called negligence. A big war has arisen. You know that other ways of destruction have been kept ready.
Sahaja Yoga is standing like a lotus in this mud; delicate, aromatic, fragrant, beautiful and you are petals of that. All the mud
which is there will fall off once you know that you are the lotus, you are not the mud. But by chance if a chakra catches, it is mud,
remove it. You have been made a lotus. You are the lotus and if the mud falls on the lotus, the lotus should throw it away and
also it is also not going to stick.
Everyone has to be aware of Sahaja Yoga. If you have to cross with the ferry of Sahaja Yoga, don’t get bogged down by small
problems of family and small problems in the house. How long are you going to hold onto this mud with your hand? There is no
one to support you. The boy is to be married, the girl is to be married, it may happen, may not happen. You will spend money on
that. You will earn a name in that. And for Sahaja Yoga, you have no time. The most important thing is that Indians don’t have
much money. if you look at it, their financial condition is not that good. But we should know that vibrations are there only in India,
which controls everything. If it were any other country it would have collapsed by now. You are living only with the help of those
Vibrations. What a big country! You are born in such a great country. You know everything. I don’t know how to tell the English
about Devi mahatmyam, they have not read it. They don’t know what Devi is and what Maa is. They are such dirty people they
don’t know what Maa is; how can I tell them what Maa is, I feel like crying. And you have become so casual and you sit in
meditation as if for a shave. How will it happen?! My brothers asked me ‘why are you struggling day in and day out? If your health
gets affected, what will we tell your husband? You sleep at night at 4 or 5 and the whole day you are working. Why are you doing
it? what are you going to get, we don’t understand’. Now they will not understand nor will I! When we both have an understanding
then only something will happen.
I can fight it out alone, but how will you benefit from that? Being casual, walking casually are signs of showing apathy towards
yourself. It’s disrespectful to yourself. The king who got the entire wealth is being so casual. Rule, Relax! Are you going to finish
Sahaja Yoga on small issues? You clean your inner being, you clean your heart. Leave the over smartness. Cleanse your heart
and check ‘Are we sitting in innocence?’ You are not doing a favour to me. It is for you; you are getting what you have been
asking, what you have been searching for ages, you are getting. When you have reached the pinnacle, why are you being mad?
You may not have seen those who turn their face away when they reach the pinnacle, but I have seen. First, you have to make
them stick. Have to keep on saying, ‘stick-on, stick on!’ Sometimes I think of you like this; ‘what can we do? Things are so bad in
our country. We are poor people, we have our problems, how can we uplift the country, Mataji? You have put us on a higher
pedestal’.
It is good that you don’t have money. I have given realisation to so many rich people here. Where are they? See only 2 or 4 here.
They are even very miserly, we don’t have a rich man among us. I have given realisation to millionaires. What are they doing? It is
good you don’t have money, it is a hassle. Very little is sticking to you. Less money is very good. I have seen rich people, people
holding positions, Ministers. They don’t have the happiness which you have. They get realisation and sit back in style, and sit

with a lot of money. Ministers and Secretaries have got their realisation. What have they done? God save us from their
arrogance. For God who is Secretary and who is king? …….Marathi conversation of Shri Mataji….. They are better than you
because they do not have the dirt of money. They do not have any position, to make them stupid. They just want Mataji.
Yesterday a few children came. Their mother said, ‘let us go’. They were saying ‘let us stay back’. They were not getting any
chocolates, nothing. ‘We don’t want any cinema, we only want Mataji. Let’s go to Mataji’. They know more than you. You also
become like them. Leave everything of the past and become like them. Now you become children. How beautiful you are. You
are also like this, son! You were also like this. Now you have all become deformed, disgusting. Be worried about it. See the
beauty of others.
I will go. When the mother is away it becomes the responsibility of children to look after the house. When I come back I should
see that My children have spread Sahaja Yoga. Otherwise, I will see that someone has a catch of Agnya chakra, someone has a
problem with the Nabhi chakra, someone has Vishuddhi problem. Someone went there, someone went there. Someone has
fallen sick, someone is unwell, someone’s wife is in hospital and someone is in a Lunatic Asylum. What has happened? Don’t
think that we are small people. You are a very great person. So-called great people are useless, they don’t get their realisation.
You realise your greatness and talk. You talk openly. If one speaks one letter of Sahaja Yoga, Goddess Saraswati will come and
sit there, I am telling you. You speak and see. You will experience it. Start talking about Sahaja Yoga, Saraswati will be in your
voice, you start writing, Saraswati will be in your writing. Start any work Hanumana will stand there with folded hands, Mother tell
me, ‘with whom shall I stand?’ Hanuman Ji is doing all your work. Whatever work you take up in the name of Mataji whatever
work you take in this world, whatever it may be, he will do it.
For Sahaja Yoga work all the five Chiranjeevis- long lived-are standing by. All of them are putting powers behind you and standing
in the background. And Nat Ji who has come, he is in a bad shape, he is looking here and there. How will the play be composed?
We don’t want a half-hearted approach. ‘I don’t get time to meditate’. What do you mean I don’t get the time? For what do you
have time? Who has given you time? If you don’t get time for yourselves, God saves you. How do you not get the time? Get up at
4 in the morning. You have woken up your Mother. How many hours does She sleep? Get up at 4 in the morning. Tell your mind, I
have to meditate from 4 to 5. Throw away the sleep. Stop staying awake in the nights, stop talking to useless people. Leave
worthless associations, leave aside relatives, they are all useless people. They are all bhoots. Have we come to waste our time
for them?
I don’t spend even one moment, you will be surprised, on anything other than Sahaja Yoga. Thousands of people come to my
husband’s office, whenever there is a reception; they all ask for their realisation Shake hands and they ask for realisation!
Whichever country I go to, I give realisation. They keep talking to me, I give realisation while talking. I see that they have got
realisation in a split second. He keeps on talking about so many things. Wherever I get an opportunity, I keep giving realisation.
At Victoria station, there was a ticket collector. He was a Muslim. When I was buying the ticket, there was a long queue and I was
giving realisation. Maybe he was from Pakistan-from wherever he maybe. I think he was from Pakistan. While standing I was
giving realisation and even to others who were standing there, I was giving realisation. While he was issuing a ticket to me, he
looked at me and he got his realisation. So he gave a ticket to all and came inside and sat inside my compartment. I was sitting
alone in that compartment. He asked Me, ‘Who are You? Why is there so much attraction in you? I asked him, ‘who are you?’. He
said his name was Hussain. I said, ‘Sit down, Hussain mian’. I said, ‘Put your hand like this’. He said, ‘What is this cool breeze
coming? Who are you? I said, ‘See and recognise.’
I went to Rome. It is an incident that happened long back. Many artists were sitting there. They were painting something. Gave
realisation to one. He got up, told something to someone and fell at my feet, sat, caught hold of both My feet and started crying,
saying loudly, ‘Mother, when did you come?’ I went there as the wife of an officer; three people were standing on this side and
four people on that side. Those people were embarrassed- what is this man doing? He said, ‘No Mother, I found You. I saw You in
my dream last night. You said you will come wearing a white sari. And you have come wearing that’.
Even for one moment, I can’t think of anything other than Sahaja Yoga. I have forgotten all my past, there have been great lives,
they have all become great. I have forgotten everything, all the details. I only remember Sahaja Yoga. I don’t remember anything.

In the same way. every moment you have to think of Sahaja Yoga, wherever you are sitting there itself. Throw away your watches
first. Throw away slavery to watches. Become a slave of Sahaja Yoga, Sahaja Yoga is your watch. It was 12:30, no harm, you
were sitting there, it is 3 you were still sitting there. You were sitting in Sahaja Yoga. Is Sahaja Yoga slave of the watch or time?
We are not slaves of any regulation or law. We are only standing in Sahaja Yoga. Whatever time it may take, we will sit there.
Wherever we are sitting, we will sit there. Are we slaves to the stomach that we have to eat on time? We are not slaves to
anything. Everything keeps happening, it is going to happen.
First of all, you leave your slavery of everything, whatever old slavery is there leave it. First of all, throw away watches. No system
has been made for anything. No system can be made in Sahaja Yoga. Its own systems are being made, let them be made. If you
make the system, that will be hailed. Don’t enforce discipline. Let its discipline be working inside. Yes, those who have not got
their realisation, discipline is required; you enforce it. But those who are realised, they have to enforce discipline inside them. The
discipline will happen inside by itself. Sahaja Yogi has an inner discipline. But if there is indiscipline here, it can’t be forgiven. But
one who is not a Sahaja Yogi, forgive him because he does not know what discipline is. He knows worldly discipline enforced
through ‘the cane’.
Let the Sahaja Yogi get the discipline from within, let him be awakened from within. Look at its discipline with which you are
moving. You are moving your limbs with its discipline, with its waves. Who has enforced discipline on the ocean’s waves? Sitting
here you can tell the time of high tide and low tide in London. Who has enforced its discipline? You are trying to enforce
someone else’s!? Learn to get into its discipline. Learn to grow with its signals and its mechanism. Its machine is working. Don’t
make any of your own. Just say, ‘let us get into Sahaja Yoga, Let us go, let us invest time in Sahaja Yoga’. If you wear a watch, it
is for Sahaja Yoga. If you put an alarm, it should be for Sahaja Yoga. …..Marathi words….See this, this age and this is Sahaja
Yoga. ..Marathi…silence….
Not even a leaf in this world can move without its discipline. Become one with it; get into its harmony – Get fully harmonised with
it; when it rises you rise when it falls you fall. If we make something of our own, we will not be in touch with it. You mold yourself
with that. It can happen only with Sahaja Yoga. It can not happen with anything else, it can’t happen with any earthly thing of the
world. There is only one way, I have told you thousands of times, I am telling you again and again; your fortress is ‘Nirvicharita
(thoughtlessness). Find out in Nirvicharita. You will know everything. Whatever you have to do, go into Nirvicharita. Do all worldly
things in Nirvicharita, you will see that it becomes dynamic. Who has seen the blooming of flowers, who has seen fruits growing,
who has seen the execution of all the worldly work? It is happening; you are moving in the same dynamism, in the same living
thing. It is coming from Nirvicharita, is n’t it?. You sit in that place, from where the whole world blooms. Make a habit of
Nirvicharita, try to be always in thoughtlessness. All the work of this world happens through that and yours also will happen. All
useless things will happen, but you have to operate the inner system yourself.
There is no age problem; no one is old. You are just born, maybe two or four years. You are all small babies. There is no issue of
age. You have to be in Nirvicharita. This is your place, this is your wealth, this is your strength, this is your power, this is your
form, this is your beauty, this is your life, Nirvichar. As soon as you become thoughtless, the machine outside starts to fully spin
in your hands. Be in thoughtlessness. There, there is no time, no direction, nor anyone can touch you. You will get to see the life
process, how life blooms. You will see its beauty, its ability. Its opulence, its truth; gaze from the place where the stream of life
flows. But becoming ill-advised, becoming a fool, how will it show to you?! Or heart becoming empty, loveless, selfish,
self-centered, thinking about oneself, thinking big of oneself, how can it show you the path- being ugly, torturing. How much
beauty should be there in the movement and speed of Sahaja Yoga? When you are doing it, there should be reverence. When you
are raising the Kundalini, there should be spirituality in your hands; you are worshipping someone’s Kundalini, someone’s
mother. How much respect you should have? How much thought you should give.
In everything, in your behaviour, in your language, in your speech, in your laughter, in your caress, in your crying, in everything you
do, your heart should be seen, vastness should be seen, the sky should be seen. A glimpse of the purity of water should be seen
inside you. The glow of the sun should be seen on your face, the coolness of the moon should flow from you. Like the air, you
should be outgoing. Your life is pulsating in the lives of all, realise this and don’t play with your life. Be very reverent and devoted
and accept it with humility, the new life which is being poured into us by Paramatma. Accept its love and compassion. Just there

is no need for taking a bath, no need for washing hands, nothing is required. Only the cleanliness of the heart is required. Clean
your heart. Pray, ‘God clean my heart’. Give up your deceit and guile. Clean your heart. You are to get into the lotus of the heart.
Clean your heart. Is my heart clean? Who are you cheating, who are you telling lies to?
You are all one. It never happens that I am telling a particular person. I am telling you all that you are all part of one body; even
that is My body, inside My body you are My projection. I am telling Myself. Who other can I tell? Who is the other? If you get sick, I
feel the pain, as if I have become sick. And when you are happy, I feel I am very happy. If you are not happy, I don’t feel happy
about anything. That is why I stay awake all day and night for your sake. The one who gets, who has time, he should give time for
this. Give full time for this. Our ashram will be built, those of you who have money can donate.
You have to give because you spend so much, what did we gain by the money you have spent so far? I don’t want your money, I
don’t want to spend your money. The ashram is being built for you, it is being built for your brothers and sisters. They have to live
there. They are getting children, they are realised; they have to go to school. There we need someone to take care of these
children. Give money for that. Without money how can the building be brought up? Even if we get one Rupee from your heart, It
has a lot of significance. I am surprised. Such people come here who hesitate to give one Rupee. There are no poor people here
if it were so it is ok. Even for giving one Rupee if they are miserly, how can they be in Sahaja Yoga. When I hear this, I am
surprised. They bother you even for giving one Rupee or five Rupees. When you have money, you donate, you have to give in
thousands, in tens of thousands. Who has given you the money? I do n’t want it. What need do I have? Please give it to yourself.
Give for your well being. You will live in those ashrams with your kith and kin, I know. You do not have to live on freebies, live like
a king. I don’t eat for free, you should also not eat for free. Whatever you can contribute, contribute. If you have time, spare your
time, if you can put in some hard work, do it. If you can awaken Kundalini, do it if you can give realisation, give it If you can
remove bhoots, remove bhoots.
Contribute to Sahaja Yoga. If you don’t do it, your ego is not going to die, your superego is not going to run away. Till you do
something for Sahaja Yoga, it will again bother you. ‘ Mother my head is caught up, Mother my daughter ran away, Mataji, this
happened to my father’. It will happen. I don’t do anything. Ganas also don’t do anything. The bhoots will catch your weakness.
They don’t trouble Me. Do you know why they don’t catch Me? ‘What has Mataji given me, Mataji has so much to him’. He had to
get so much. He got it. What you got also is not less. You don’t value what you got. You should be satisfied within. Catch hold of
satisfaction from inside. Establish yourself on that satisfaction. How should I tell you this, there is a computer for this, it has
points. If you press one finger, your satisfaction will be awakened, if you press one finger your innocence will be awakened, if you
press one finger truth will be awakened. This is all inside you, by pressing the fingers like this, the entire program can be set. Shri
Mataji keeps doing this. In the first place, there should be innocence there. There should be some satisfaction there, otherwise,
you press the finger, what will come out from there-vacuum?!
There is nothing inside. One who has added satisfaction, he will reach satisfaction. We are sitting in satisfaction at this time. We
have reached righteousness. We are sitting in righteousness at this time. All have accumulated wealth after burning the body for
years and now it is present before you. Like this, you have to keep adding everything, add satisfaction, a lot of it. Come into
innocence, come into righteousness. Come into the truth, come into the beauty, Come into love, you have a button for everything.
How will it happen, how to do it? Sahaja Yoga does n’t have to do it. It all happens. There is no such word like ‘How?’ in Sahaja
Yoga.
You can earn whatever you want to be inside you. If you want satisfaction, you can earn satisfaction. You can earn everything
and keep inside. Press a button and you will keep getting what you want. A machine will manifest inside you. I don’t know how
you will earn these-You add your earning!

1975-0209, Meditation and Prayer, Prayer To The Almighty, Dhyan Aur Prathna
View online.
9 February 1975
Talk to Sahaja Yogis
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft
1975-02-09, Meditation and Prayer, Mumbai
The most important part of Sahaja Yoga is that, to progress in it, you have to meditate. Meditation is very important. Even if you
don’t do anything else but meditate, you can progress in Sahaja Yoga. As I told you, this is a new path, a new dimension. A new
thing. In which you have jumped in. In your mind, in that Sea you have gone in. But if you want to get inside of it, you have to
meditate.
Some people say, Mother I don’t get time to meditate. Modern man has clock now a days to save time. But he doesn’t know what
is he saving time for? That he doesn’t know. The time is being saved for Sahaja Yoga. There was this gentleman who wanted to
go to London. He was saying, Mother please get me the ticket, talk to someone in air India, please let me go there, I have to go
through this plane only. Mother asked : « what’s the matter, what is important ? » He said : « Mother I must go there I have to
save time. » « What’s the matter, why are you saving time to go there? » « Mother because there is a special dinner and then there
is a ballroom. »
Just remember that the watch on your hands is just for Sahaja Yoga. For a person who spends his whole time in Sahaja Yoga, it
is not important that he does office work or house work, but he should do it in Meditation. While doing every task, you can be
nirvachar. When you are in thoughtless, you’ll get all: beauty, knowledge of that task and all joy of that task. People don’t
understand this, this is why they start fighting that they are not getting time for meditation. But what you start enjoying It, you
realize that once you start meditating, even your sleep gets shorter, even in your sleep you go into meditation.
You don’t have to leave or decrease anything. But what we think are very important don’t stay as important, and what we don’t
think special become special.
Before meditation remember one thing, which instrument (Veena) in which this alaap (the first notes of Raaga) is going to start
should be clean (synchronised). You are not that Veena or that Alaap but you are owner of it. You are the one who is playing it
and enjoying alaap. If that Veena is not in tune, wires are rusted, then it is important that you clean it. If they are not right, then
you don’t have that sweetness in your life, you can’t get that beauty. You have that biliousness, dryness and instability in your
vision.
It becomes a big thing for Me to see that some Sahaja yogis are meditating with that determination and going deeper. Whereas
others are not. I can’t say if all of you can go into that state. Whatever you can achieve (in Sahaja yoga) you should try to achieve
in this life time itself. Whatever time you gain should be spent on this. The other things do not matter.
People will talk about everything else but not about going deeper than this. Like about meditation, improving yourself, cleaning
yourself. « He said this, he said that, this should have happened, this shouldn’t have happened », Does it look good for a Sahaja
Yogi? When you have this huge wealth of Nirvichar (Thoughlessness) then we should bring it out fully.
You know that every moment you are getting it and also losing it. Every moment is important. What about holding or letting it go,
have I told you anything. « So should I leave family life? » No, did I leave it? You know that I work harder than most of you. But I
am not tired, because you give Me joy, when I see you, it gives Me joy. My heart fills with joy.

Whatever has importance, keep your attention there. I don’t say that you should sit here 24 hours. But wherever you are sitting,
just keep sitting there on that throne. So many people don’t have physical problems, but there are still some mental questions.
Forget about all those things. Every person can get it. It is your birth right because it was with you at your birth. But you have to
meditate. But don’t worry about arranging it, don’t worry about it. How does it matter if there are 10 people more or 10 people
less? Instead of 1000 bad people, just 10 good people is good for Sahaja. Please be one of those 10 people who are enjoying
Sahaja, doing Sahaja work with extreme love, enjoying it, and are standing in first lane. Like the Himalayas who is the highest and
everyone looks at it. Let everyone look at you and think, that: « I should be like that person, if I grow in Sahaja, I grow like him. »
This is something of inside and not outside. I know who is going where. You are blocking yourself, no one else can stop you. No
person in the world, mantra tantra can stop you. You stay with Your Self. Just witness which person talks about what, you’ll know
that there is some negativity in that person which is why he or she is talking about that. Whether it is your husband or wife, you
don’t have to argue, there is no point. He or she will get better on their own.
Not just that, you know that if you have any deformities, you know how to move your hands and clean them. Even in your fingers
and hands, all gods are awakened. But it is very important that these gods are not insulted anywhere. They should be
worshipped in properly. Our hands should be like , that they are worshippable. People should feel that these hands have the flow
of Shri Ganga. The reason why River Ganga is pure, that is because of the vibrations, is flowing through your hands. The energy
which is running whole universe is flowing through you. This hands and legs where the energy is flowing, keep them pure. It is
not about just cleansing but about doing things from it do it with beauty and in worshipping way.
Your job is to get speed up in meditation, that’s your job. If someone says that I do this or that, then you should know that I
release My Maya and a lot of people have got hurt because of it. Its just happening, like this is moving, this is coming. Do
everything in akarma. Like the Sun never says that I am giving the light to everyone. He is just giving. He is flowing that huge
energy from it. Just like that those energies are flowing you because you are micro machines. You are not a machine like the
sun, but a very special machine, a micro machine. The vibrations which flow through you will not only give you a special
experience but also to others. You can cure the very subtle aspects of their body and the minute instruments within them. The
energy which is flowing is of love and thus I do not know how to describe it.
If you want to clean this worldly machine, you can fix them by changing parts, rubbing against something, filing. But the human
machines are much more complex than that. They cannot be fixed that way. They could be cleansed only by love. They have so
many scars. You can only fix those with love. Human is very sad. These vibrations are nothing but love. When you lose love, you
lose vibrations.
« Mother we had a badha, these vibrations have stopped coming! » It ’s because the love has stopped. When it starts [again],
vibrations will start flowing again. If you are holding on to Love, vibrations will keep flowing. These vibrations, which is the love of
God, keeps on flowing. That is the only thing which is flowing. This is an amazing feeling, it is an amazing moment. Will it get
destroyed because you did not give Me your full support ?
Everything you can know yourself, else I am here to explain you everything. But I have to give a small suggestion, just think about
it, are you qualified to get it? Just because you came to my programs you don’t become eligible. You become eligible when you
get those depth. Like the pot, the deep it is, more water it gets. If it is small, it will overflow. You have to have that depth in your
meditation. Look at those meditating. Go deeper in that after thoughtlessness. You will reach the Unconscious [the Collective
Consciousness] through your conscious.
Your own consciousness will go away and then you will know the Unconscious.
It is the first time that you know yourself and others via Collective Consciousness. But very few people value it.
Some of you say, Mother if you take money from people, they will value it. But Money is a Bhoot. If by taking money you

understand its value, then its better you don’t. No one can understand it from money, you have to give yourself. And what you get
in return is much more and very quickly.
You have to come fully in meditation as group. It is very important. Even if you do it once a month, you have to do it. It’s part of
the Virata, so every part of it has to awaken. The more it is awakened the more lamps will be lit.
Even if you meditate everyday at home you can see you didn’t do much as compared to those 6-7 people who came here
everyday and rose. If in meditation your eyes are blinking it means your Agnya chakra is getting hurt. Nothing to take personally
here, it means you have to fix it. If you are sitting in meditation but your body is shaking, that means your Mooladhara chakra is
getting hurt. Which is much more dangerous. So your Mooladhara has to be fixed.
In order to understand, you can listen to all my lecture and know everything. But a few new comers can go ahead of you. It’s not
about something to learn and teach. It’s not about that. If your hands are shaking then you should understand that there is some
serious problem inside you. For this problem, beating with shoes is the best solution.
Yesterday a gentleman had come who told me that he was feeling heaviness and began shaking in front of Me. So I asked him: «
who is your guru ? » He replied that there is one Mr Bhagawat in Pune. I asked him what does he do ? He said that “he has started
a spiritual center and he gave me a diksha (initiated me)”. So I asked him what diksha did he receive? The diksha of shaking. So
he said: « In 16 years I had health problems and even lost the job. » I said « did you not have wisdom? If you have guru then it
shouldn’t have happened. How much have you paid? » For the moment I have already paid five to six thousand rupees. So I said:
« You have paid five to six thousand rupees and got all the sicknesses?! » Then we did shoe beating to this Mr Bhagawat and
also the center. Then the shaking of hands stopped. This happened in front of all of you yesterday. We should talk to them
clearly that you have a guru and a badha (catch), there is nothing to feel bad about.
But I have noticed that if one has a catch then another person who has the catch is attracted to such a person. All the persons
having catches sit together in a line. You should not sit this way.
You should sit separately. Don’t make group. Making group is bad. For example people from Thane (a town north of Mumbai) sit
together. You should sit separately. There are some old persons, some of medium age and some are kids. For kids there is no
problem. Elders should sit with youngsters and youngsters should sit with the elders. If elders sit together it creates a problem, if
youngers sit together it also creates a problem. You will see it happens. The understanding of old and young is [inaudible] and
can be understood in collective vibrations.
Elder should be wise, they should have baddapan (big heart), and youngsters should listen to elders and in youngsters, activities
should me more than elders. If elders are respectable, then people will respect them. But elders should try to be respectful and
youngsters should respect elders.
One Sahaja Yogi should not show disrespect another Sahaja Yogi because you are all like gods and goddesses. You can
understand all this in your meditation.
When you’ll earnestly try to think about somebody, you’ ll know that it is happening because other person has Agnya catch or say
Heart catch, so it is happening. That’s why the sound [from our body which is like a veena] even is not emitted correctly and you’ll
not feel bad and the other person will also not feel bad. But if you feel bad that itself is a very big negativity. People even feel bad
of what I say so what can one says about others. So you should not feel bad of whatever I say because I tell it for your own good.
Whenever you are talking about anything, make sure that you are talking that where is your kundalini? where are we going? how
is it? Everything else is useless. How much have we established ourselves in dharma? How much joy have we got? how much
are we enjoying the love of God? These are the only experiences we have to share between us, everything else is vain.
Concerning the discussion about other things, maouna (silence) is the best approach. When you get these kind of Sahaja Yogis,
it will create a huge difference. The reflection of Sahaja Yoga will come from you. Whenever you want to reflect, you should be

very clean. When you become fully reflective, then there will be no [inaudible].
Sahaja Yoga won’t spread from big bands, events, big size nope. Nothing will happen from all this. I have never seen these many
realized people in my life. This is amazing. But as I say, in modern times, no one is a complete saint. You were saints before,
lived in jungles. Now you have taken birth in this world and are a part of it. Try to get down into this saintliness, you’ll enjoy. It will
be like in this river Ganga Yamuna, Saraswati will start flowing.
When you are going to meditation, forget about all the outside sounds. When you are in meditation, and close your ears, you can
still hear because you listen from Sahasrara. Those boys who came here who couldn't hear started hearing a bit from Sahasrara.
If your Sahasrara is open, in your lymbic area, you have certain points in your lymbic area which when excited do the exact same
job which your mouth, ear, nose do. All the organs can feel. If we open same Sahasrara, we don’t need to breath and smell from
nose, you can do it from Sahasrara. Even if all your body is destroyed still you can do everything from your Sahasrara. But it
doesn’t happen. Health of the body is constantly improving, diseases have already disappeared. Even if some (diseases) are left,
they get cured easily.
In meditation, if you want to grow, there is one guna which you really need. It is called innocence. Like a child. You can see how
small kids can rise so quickly. Cunning people, over smart people, they can’t go through. If you give pain, or hurt someone, this is
also against the innocence. If we sit on the heads of so many people, can we be innocent? If someone is hurt (by our behaviour),
that person cannot be innocent. Innocence itself means, that flower like open which only gives joy to the world, good smell.
Never give pain or hurt anyone. Yes, sometimes people feel hurt because of their stupidity, it is understandable. But don’t do it
consciously. You don’t have innocence switch. If you’ve had the switch of innocence , as soon as it is put on your Agnya will be
cleared immediately. You neither have the switch of peace, kindness, you do not have all these switches inside you. First awaken
all the deities in you and then one by one all these switches will come up. But most easy to put is innocence one because we
were very innocent when we were kids. When you spend time with kids and talk to them, or remember their words then you
develop a lot of innocence.
Those who become innocent, they become eligible for kingdom of heaven. In your meditation, just see where is my mind
diverting now in what cunning plan, what stupidity. Just witness it. Thoughlessness is innocence.
When you go into meditation — we won’t meditate for that long today — but check which chakra is catching. On your fingers you
can tell which fingers are catch, if they are burning just shake it or put a bandhan. But stay in thoughtlessness with your attention
on the Sahasrara. Those who have come for the first time, we have to see if they have received their Realization or not. What
troubles they are suffering from and what chakras are catching. All these catches are outside.
Even by moving the hands in this way you can put a bandhan. You can press it like that or throw away like that. This is also a big
surrender in itself. Right in the center is a Shushumna Nadi. It has to be awakened. If it is awakened, it means, from all these
fingers you ll get cool air. If you are feeling these cool breeze and you are thoughtless, you are moving forward, like you are in
aeroplane and moving forward, you don’t know where it is going but you are going.
Whilst I am here, the Sahaja yogis should participate actively and progress. Even when I go, don’t destroy collectivity. For
anything stupid you say, you have to punish yourself. You should prohibit others to talk about anything else except Sahaja Yoga.
Don’t talk about outside. Talk about inside. Whoever is getting catch, clean it. You need not feel ashamed. If your hands are
burning you should clean them (chakras). What else can you do?
You know other ways to clean yourself in meditation. Don’t take umbrage when I tell you to do footsoak. Why you feel bad. It is
stupidity to feel bad on such trivial things if I tell you some things. Who are you ? Are you a big saint ? Even big saints cleanse
themselves.
Like Kabira said that, “Das Kabir jatan se odhi” (This body of mine, the sheet which is created by God, I kept it as I got it, didn’t
spoil it) even when he was such a great man. So why should you feel bad. If I ask anyone to bring a matka [earthen pot] he feels

hurt. And then he brings a very big matka ! We should abandon whatever foolish ideas we have about ourselves. We have to be
childlike and not childish.
Now we will go into meditation
You will all sit this way. As I said before, just fill yourself with love. You know that I am your Mother, that means you have
complete protection, nothing bad is going to happen. Just put your hands towards me. Just close your eyes slowly and look at
your thoughts and you ll be thoughtless. As soon as you are thoughtless you will go within yourself. You should just decide that
from today I will not hurt anyone. And God forgive all who have hurt me and please forgive me because I have also hurt a lot of
people. Whatever you say, God will do it. Ask for peace, he will give you peace, but you do not ask for peace. If you ask for
satisfaction he will grant it to you. But you do not ask. If you ask for a good character, he will grant it to you. Now prayer has a
meaning because now you have connection with God.
Please give me love. Love for whole world. Please give me sweetness, madhurya. Please give me pleasantness.
Whatever you will ask for, He will give you. Don’t ask for anything else, ask only for yourself:
"Please protect me at Your feet.
Give me a place at Your feet.
Take this drop in Your ocean.
Whatever impurity I have, please remove it".
Whatever you pray to God, that will happen:
"Please, make me vast.
Please, make me wise.
Please, give me Your wisdom.
Please, give me Your knowledge.
Let the whole Universe be blessed.
Let there be love in whole world.
Let there be Kingdom of love on earth.
Please, let this lamp burn for that.
Let my body, my heart, my mind burn for that".
Ask whatever is beautiful. He will give you. You ask for ugly, He still gives you. Even when you ask for useless things He gives
them to you. So when you ask for real, will He not give you that? Don’t ask superficially but from your heart.
You must pray to God and ask what you want. Ask for complete satisfaction in my heart, joy in my heart, bliss in my heart, so that
the whole world becomes blissful.
Give me love, love that I could love the whole world and that the whole world becomes one in love.
Give salvation to this humanity which is suffering.
Take me to Your feet.
Cleanse me with Thy love".
Now see if there is God or not? You can feel it within yourself. He hears you. He understands you. He’s the glory of all the glory.
He loves you. He protects you. He guides you. He's created you to reveal His love, but accept it.
Any time, any thought is coming you pray and you will be moving in the waves of that ocean which is Unconscious Mind, which
starts with thoughtless awareness.
[Long pause]

If you cannot become thoughtless, you pray to Him: “Forgive me for what I have done and forgive those who have done harm to
me.”

1975-0213, Public Program
View online.
13 February 1975
Public Program
Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - VERIFIED
Sweet Home Hall, Dadar, 1975-02-13
The self-realisation, which we know by the name of Kundalini, does not awaken through external factors such as one's practice,
effort, money, labour, influence. In every religion, different arrangements have been made for Kundalini awakening. For instance,
the ‘Namaz’ for Muslims is a complete arrangement for Kundalini awakening…putting hands like this (palm facing upwards),
bending, lowering the head, holding ears, putting fingers in ears, etc. are all for Kundalini awakening. But it is all mechanical,
artificial. Like any part of a machine can't function without power, in the same way, the subtle vibration inside us, which we know
by the name of Kundalini, this also can't be awakened, with any human effort or through any artificial instrument.
In the same way, in the prayers of Christians, there is an arrangement for Kundalini awakening right from the beginning, they give
initiation to a child, which is called 'Baptising'. Before Christ, whenever people were initiated into religion, they were made to take
a dip in the river. You are aware of how much relief you get when you get into a river after your realisation. Those who were
making people take a dip were not realised souls. Those who told them about religion were not accomplished people. They were
doing it in an artificial manner. They brought someone, dipped them in water, brought them out and baptised them by performing
some religious rituals. Even there, there is a ritual called 'communion ', in which wine is used. Actually, it should not be wine, but
grape juice, but they have made it into wine and they give two things to everyone to eat. You know that we also give water, and
‘chana’ (roasted chickpea) for clearing the Nabhi chakra. This is the arrangement for clearing Nabhi Chakra.
In Hindu religion, for ages people have made arrangements primarily for Kundalini awakening. But we saw it in the most beautiful
form in the incarnation of Shri Krishna. The rationale behind the antics of Krishna such as stealing of butter and tying people up
around himself was that if they were all tied to his Nabhi chakra, their Nabhis will also be cleared. The purpose behind Radha Ji
going into river Yamuna and filling water was to vibrate the water of Yamuna river. When She carried the earthen water pitcher on
Her head, Shri Krishna would break it by throwing a stone at it, the water would again trickle down Her back through Her
Kundalini, getting double vibrated and ultimately falling on the land and vibrating the entire earth. So much calculation and
planning was done. Only Radha Ji could do it, no one else was capable of doing it. Gopis (playmates and devotees of Krishna)
going to the ‘pan-ghat’ (waterway) has a lot of significance for us. During the incarnation of Krishna, gopis used to do many other
chores, but getting water from ‘panghat’ was considered very special. Its symbolic significance was that Radha Ji used to sit
with Her feet in the river and the water used to get vibrated. The gopis used to fill their pitchers with this water and take it home
and this cleared their Nabhi chakra. Ras Leela is also nothing but Sahaja Yoga. You have seen that many times I tell you to sit
whilst holding each others’ hands. This is not a mechanical thing; in Sahaja Yoga, many people turn mechanical. They start doing
things mechanically. It is not at all a mechanical thing. Every action has to be understood carefully and you should know the
meaning of every action and which chakra is getting relief due to that.
Whatever chakras we have in our body, in all those chakras My powers are in-built. When we bring them into use, those chakras
become weak, their powers get reduced. There is only one nadi (channel) called Sushumna Nadi, whose internal power becomes
Kundalini and gets hidden. We can’t bring it to use and presiding deities of all the chakras are only seated on that nadi. When we
expend the energies of these chakras and go on exhausting them, we reach such a state where all the energy is exhausted and
presiding deities residing in those chakras become tired, dry and may disappear.
In such a state, diseases like cancer can start. Due to excessive usage of any chakra- the area surrounding the chakra which it
nourishes with its energy, becomes depleted and the nerves and organs of the body become diseased. But this Shakti has to be

used. In all circumstances, this power has to be used.
When you use it for religious purposes, our dharmic power gets exhausted. When we use it for dharmic (religious) purposes, the
dharmic shakti also gets exhausted. That is why, for dharmic people, there is a lot of pressure, especially on the Vishuddhi
Chakra, like reciting mantras. Reciting mantras harms 'vaikhari', because the voice comes out of here. When we take the mantras
in a very mechanical way, this power becomes weak and you will be surprised that at this place of Shri Krishna at the Vishuddhi
chakra, for those who chant the names of Radha-Krishna day and night, their chakra becomes weak. It is very surprising that you
take the name of Radha-Krishna and your Vishuddhi chakra gets damaged! Many people chant the name of Shiv Ji in all possible
ways. I have not seen so far that anyone who takes the name of Shiv Ji before realisation, does not have a catch in their Heart
Chakra. It will have to catch because His name is taken in the Heart chakra and your Vishuddhi chakra will be caught up too
because you take His name through ‘vaikhari’; Vishuddhi chakra will be caught up and also the Heart chakra will be caught up.
This way we keep committing all types of mistakes, because when a blind man….
Roughly for three minutes….Audio -missing, unintelligible and poor quality. From 10.55 to 13.45
That is the same condition for all efforts like Pranayam. Those who do Hatha Yoga, those who think they are doing Hatha Yoga,
in reality, you can't do Hatha Yoga, because Hatha Yoga means, 'Ha' and 'Tha' - these are two Nadis (channels); 'Ha' is what we
call 'Surya (Sun) Nadi'. Whatever they do, they do on Surya Nadi, but doing it on 'Tha Nadi' is very difficult (and 'Tha' is what we
call 'Chandra (Moon) Nadi') and to get into your Chandra Nadi means you have to go beyond your mind. Those who are only on
Chandra Nadi, they learn 'Bhoot vidya' and those who are on Surya Nadi, they become egoistic demons or egoistic saints, whom
we may call charismatic, but they can't love anyone or uplift anyone- they can only curse.
That is why even in the matters of religion, many mistakes have been committed - it keeps happening. That is why a person who
looks very dharmic outwardly, does not get realisation easily and he who looks very adharmic, he may get his realisation in a split
second.
What is the thing of essence? It is not that either the desire or inward seeking is less. What is the difference between the two,
one should understand this; one person's attention is complicated and another person's attention is light. One person's attention
is on fasting on Saturday and if he does not fast on a Saturday, he will not sleep at least the whole week. Such a person will never
get his realisation. Whether you fast on Saturday or Sunday, how does it matter to God? Has God given you birth for fasting? But
he has also not given you birth just for eating. A person's attention is on food because he has to fast, or he has to think of food
all the time, the attention of both is gone. For many people, they are bent on getting up at 4 am, even if the world goes upside
down. On a day when they can't get up at 4 am but 5 am, they will trouble everyone. How does that matter? We will get up at
whatever time when we feel like we get up, feel the joy, otherwise we will not get up. For any resolution of this type, our attention
sticks like a calculating accountant. Some are like this and some are lazy and neglectful. He constantly thinks about when he
can sleep peacefully. All the thinking is about sleeping. ‘The bed has to be like this, this arrangement has to be there. I need this
comfort, I need that comfort. I need a dress like this. If I don't get a dress like that, he won't touch or wear it.’ If his suit is not
ironed one day, he will lift the whole house on his head, but his suit has to be ironed first. If her sari does not match...that’s it! The
body matches or not, whether she is matching with the world or not… whether she is in harmony or not - that is not important.
The sari not matching is more important and she will make everyone's life miserable, from mother-in-law to father-in-law.
This is the hold of attention. For a person whose attention is spent for so long on any mundane issue, he will not get his
realisation. If the attention of anyone sticks on anything, his attention will get caught up in such a way that he is lost to the world.
No one can tell him why he is caught up like this and then it becomes a mania., He gets into madness as if troubled by a bug
that’s got into his brain. If you ask him if a bug got into your brain, he will not admit it. But if he does not get his realisation, he will
ask. 'Why am I not getting my realisation?' 'Look, it is because a bug has got into your brain'.
We can call it obsessiveness, but sometimes it becomes so heightened that it reached its limit. Like some people are obsessed
with cleanliness, especially Maharashtrian women. ‘I want everything absolutely clean.’ They make men's and everyone’s lives in
the household miserable for cleanliness. ‘I want cleanliness.’ This type of madness must be surprising to you. You must have

heard that some people come to me for treatment for this. Recently a lady came. I asked, 'What is her problem?' ‘She washes her
hands very frequently and if she goes to the bathroom, she spends hours there. She scratches her hair- she does not like them.’ It
is madness.
And the other extreme is to remain unclean, whatever may happen, whether they feel itchy or any other thing may happen. They
think they have become saints and it doesn’t matter if they get itchy. Both are extreme behaviours and because of this, your
attention wavers from one place to another. Extreme behaviour can be like an intoxication with alcohol. Man doesn’t realise that
he slowly becomes superfluous. He thinks that ‘it is my birth right to be extravagant and the entire world will say,' Let us keep
him cool. God save us from him and keep us well’'. Becoming extravagant is not the path to Sahaja Yoga. The path of Sahaja
Yoga is in the centre.
If someone wants to make money, he will keep on making money. It is another madness. They are not satisfied, even though
they are earning throughout their lives. Some are after positions and they are running after positions but they are not satisfied.
The other side is INAUDIBLE AUDIO …..
They have also written a poem on beggary! Sahaja Yoga is not for those who live in slums or palaces. Sahaja Yoga is not for
those who despite living in a palace want to get another ten built. Sahaja Yoga is only for such a person, who has contentment in
him, one who thinks, ‘I have earned enough and have got enough possessions, a little more for carrying on day-to-day life is all
that I need’. One should have contentment. He who lives in a palace but is content is alright for Sahaja Yoga. He who lives in
slums and has contentment, he is also okay for Sahaja Yoga. Contentment is in the middle path. When the man is contended, his
chakras do not open much and there is no pressure on them.
We have a lot of fantasies about our responsibilities in our minds. Being extreme on this count is against Sahaja Yoga. There is
no excess of anything in Sahaja Yoga. That means that whatever is there, you should be frank about it. I am not against anything.
Those who want to earn money like mad people, let them earn. Those who want to beg, let them beg. We don’t have to respond
to them. But those who want to come into Sahaja Yoga, they should understand that some satisfaction is required.
Another thing is those people who are very vindictive. I can express it better in Marathi as I have seen my elders do this....Shri
Mataji speaks in Marathi. Those who say, I do not like this at all- who are you to say that?. ‘I don't like this, I don't like that’- one
who uses such language is not any good for Sahaja Yoga. If someone is vindictive, or tries to be overbearing, just say ‘I don't
care. Where do I have the time for talking to such beggars? Where do I have time for talking to such affluent people or such
useless people?’ Only when this happens, Sahaja Yoga can get established, because Sahaja Yoga is a revolutionary path in the
centre. Such people, I told you earlier, will be called missing links. When you live in that kingdom, they will be called ‘missing
links’, who are extreme. When you will be in the state of evolution, these people will be known as missing links, those who live in
extremes.
That is why forgiveness is built in as a cure for this inside a human being. First, you should have contentment and secondly, if
you can forgive people, half of your energy is saved. Supposing you abuse Me and I keep thinking, how can I abuse you back. If I
don't know how to abuse, I would go to a friend for advice on ‘how can I abuse this person who used these abusive words
against me?’ I keep on thinking, I run here, I run there. Instead, if someone abuses and I forgive, it's all over. That chapter is over!
Nothing further! As soon as you forgive, the other person will also change. There is no bigger weapon than to know how to
forgive. The day you know the mantra of forgiveness, the same day your Kundalini will cross your Sahasrar.
Let us look at Agnya chakra, which the Kundalini finds very difficult to pierce. If the Kundalini stops there, if you have a problem
with your Agnya chakra, the first thing you should learn is to forgive. If you get any thoughts against anyone in your mind, you
should tell yourself, 'Beware, forgive'. Whoever comes to trouble you, forgive. Another person comes, 'You came to beat me the
other day, forgive'. He will go. Now comes the third person, 'you abused me, I forgive'. Fourth one comes, 'he had insulted you,
forgive'. If at Agnya chakra, one can't forgive, it is very difficult to keep Agnya chakra in proper condition. It is not that you do it to
please Me. Not for Me. You- for your own sake, in your mind and with a clean heart say, 'I have forgiven everyone'. If you don't
forgive, all your energy will be spent in planning revenge- ‘hit him, beat him, do this, do that, abuse him’. If he has hurled 4 abuses

against you, you hurl 10 abuses, take an army from here, take an army from there. Just by saying the word 'forgive', all your
Agnya chakras have cleared. Forgiveness is such a tremendous attribute.
The other thing which is very essential for Sahaj yogis is that they should have love in their hearts. The heart should be clean.
There should be a cleansing of the heart. Those who deceive, tell lies, say this here, say that there, say bad things behind others’
backs, such people will never get their realisation. Even if they get it, they will have catches on their chakras very frequently.
Those who gossip around, their heart will catch and also surely Agnya Chakra will also catch because they will lose their ability
to forgive. God rarely forgives such people.
Someone who deceives, cheats, pretends, lies and who without realisation gives discourses for money, is committing a very big
crime. God will never forgive such people. Whoever does any religious work without getting his self-realisation, he will be a big
criminal in the eyes of Paramatma (God) and that is why God will never forgive him. One who makes money in the name of
religion in the society, in a temple or a mosque, there is no one more unholy and evil than him.
I told you that when I went to Mathura, I noticed that all the chiefs of the cults are demons who have taken birth in Kali Yug and
are working there as 'Pandas' (religious persons performing rituals). It is like this in all religions. All the demons (rakshasas) are
wearing religious masks but their crimes are unforgivable. You are daring to cheat in the court of Paramatma; there can't be a
greater stupidity than this.
In the essence of all endeavours, the important quality that should be there in a human being is purity, you call it innocence.
Purity. Keeping oneself pure, not talking ill of others, not allowing any impure thought to come into one’s mind- this is the biggest
YAgnya (sacrifice), which happens after Sahaja Yoga. That is why small children get their realisation very quickly and get it. The
essence of all things flows from the feet of Shri Ganesha, which we know by the name of auspiciousness. He’s the one who has
created the universe and will also bring forth the dissolution of this creation and because of whom a new type of human being
can also be created that Sahaja Yoga is establishing. That’s why a person who does not have any aspect of the auspiciousness
is not human but...
(Audio abruptly cut)
End of Recording

1975-0216, Public Program: Sharirik bimariya Vibration se thik ho sakti hai
View online.
16 February 1975
Public Program
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: Hindi | Translation (Hindi to English) - Draft [Hindi to English translation]
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai (India)Public program, 1977-0731, Kundalini and Self-realization
As on today, as a mother, I ... I have arrived, whose name is very amazing. But you may not believe that an ordinary woman, like
you, living in a household like this..... How did I come? That... The name is easy moksha. Before we know what is Sahaja, we
should know what salvation is. What is salvation? Why did we come into this world? Why did man evolve? Why was man
specially created?
Why did God give this beautiful creature so many powers from a special artwork? Only after understanding this, you will know
that your whole existence, your whole existence, has been created to immerse you in great bliss.
God worked hard for this. Now there may be such people among you who will say, "Mother, where is God?" We need to do that...
You have to start with the first step. Whether God exists or not, this thing is very easily understood, if you are a science teacher.
Science in itself has now proved that there is God. You go to a chemistry person and ask him how God has systematically
created all the elements of the world one after the other. And how systematically grouped them into eight divisions, can
something, like this be without thinking, by some planning? If you ... If you go to him and ask him, "What is this earth, which
creature has made such a vigorously rotating earth, that people are still sitting comfortably on it?" If there were to be a more
mass anywhere on this earth, this earth could be shaky. It can be completely shaky. Its whole conduction, how much of its
arrangement, how much of our distance from the sun, how wonderful is the whole system, that someone or the other, someone
or the other must surely be a magician. Then you can look at yourself, who are the ones who run this heart, who runs this heart?
Thereof... Name it, name nature, name nature, call it God, whatever you may call it in your language, but you started behaving like
a psychologist that there is such a universal soul inside you, which they call unconscious, universal unconscious. Whatever
strange things it does for us, brings us in balance, sustains us, tells us in dreams, whoever says it. The verge on which man has
reached today, he must understand that there does exist some ditch. Until the ditch was visible, it is necessary to take one to the
ditch. In that creation, in that nature, in the power of that God, all this creation is very beautiful. He used three powers. He
sustained it by one power, through which he is the master of his power, the program of his power, his game, and if he does not
like it, he also destroys it. Many such creations have happened and have ended. The second power is to see, witness and being
witness. Which many people call destroying power. And the other power that creates. Big planets, stars, moon, sun, clusters of
stars, beautiful things like earth, for this creative power, that you may call creative power, it may be called God too.
If you take a small atom, molecule of sulphur dioxide, you will be surprised at the vibrations emanating from inside a sulphur!
However, this...is electric like its electro magnet. But who's driving it there? Anyone who's running that thing in a tiny atom? Who
is vibrated in that molecule ?. If I don't speak here, you won't have a reach to voice. The same power is working in that small
atom, which ...... the whole creation And she thinks, understands and is disciplined with everything. Whether you believe it or not.
The third power that God has used has been used very well. That is the power of evolution, the power of revolution. The power
due to which man gradually came to this state, came to this state of consciousness. The power present in that sulphur dioxide
does not know that any power is located within me.
They don't even know where I stand, what's going on inside her. What is my atomic status? She doesn't know anything. I'm just
existing. Where is here, it is completely disciplined. After that, his third power is there, vibration of life began in that. Due to this
power, after the vibration of life started, evolution started in man. I would say that it happened first in every living being. Even
before that, as you know, it happened in vegetation and today in man has reached to the end of that evolution. If you look at a

monkey's head, it seems to be cut in half from here. This head, was our need to grow, which is fore-head, from which we think.
Do planning. With which we run our ego. This too is something given by God. No need to fret it. There is no need to panic. This
part should have come so elongated in us. The living apparatus of our body also had to be so fully developed. That is why this
happened. Today that day has come, today the time has come, that you are ready. It has been described in our books and
scriptures by great sages and in every religion. Many have not read it, many have not understood it, have not known it, but today
the time has come to know it. In this way, the three dimensions that were in us till today. The time has come to move from the
three dimensions that we were walking on to the fourth dimensions, and since long now the fourth dimension is being talked
about.
Not only that, its being talked about, its gesture is also in our minds. We now understand that there must be some power beyond
us that drives us. This.. It's a new discovery. All the scientists, sitting in their places and got amazed that what we took so much
common till date is ..... it was not right. It's saying something else. The source for all these powers is the fourth dimension, the
fourth dimension. The formula that operates all the powers is beyond these three powers. To become one with that thread, to be
identified with it, beyond the three gunas, beyond thoughts, is liberation. This is the path to salvation. Where you wake up
thoughtlessly, you don't sleep. I'm not talking about trance. that's an elusive game, about which I'll tell you later.
I'm talking about knowing you awakened, in search of you. Because whatever evolution has taken place of animals till date, there
has been evolution, when they have become humans, they had no consciousness. In their senses, they were not evolution.
Because that is disciplined. But man became independent. Later, after independence, he found his way and has extended his this
part, from where it is thought and planned. See later. Only when this yantra is fully ready, this light is going to awaken. As if you
decorated with the lamp. They have put a twig in it, they have put oil in it. All three dimensions are ready, now it's just a matter of
putting the twig into it. It is a matter of lighting the lamp in some way. A lit lamp can enlighten it up. But without lighting a lamp, it
cannot enlighten it and it can be awakened Sahaja way. The meaning of salvation is simply that to immerse ourselves in the
source, through which the creative work of the whole creation has been done and by which we too are created, to become one
with that power, at that time these powers start flowing themselves from within. Like light from inside flowers. But in this
thought process and this... Humans make big mistakes. I'm not talking about other mistakes that are unethical. But even in
righteousness, great mistakes were made. A lot of mistakes have been made. All can be forgiven, because in ignorance the child
can do anything. But love is such an absolute power that it can forgive all mistakes.
Donate to that ultimate thing..... The power of this love has created the whole world. That love created you. And today the love
that resides inside you awakens. This can make the whole world loving. Bharat is a land of great yoga. You don't know it today.
When that thing starts flowing from inside you, then you will know that this pulsating thing on this earth, it does not come
anywhere in any country. Just as lotuses bloom in the mud, in the same way, we have had great yogis. The mud is increasing, the
lotus is decreasing. When will the fragrance of the lotus be so much that when it ends the fragrance of mud? If you are prepared,
then for you the time has come for the lotus to bloom. What should you do for that? How will it happen? What to do? Therefore
also it is this thing, that spontaneous, Sahj, Sa ha ja , sah means with, with, ja means born, born. What do you have to do for what
you are born with? You have your eye with you. You have your nose with it. You have this whole body with you. ..... What to do
with it? In the same way, your ego is born with you. Your birth is systematically cherished and decorated you within the forewalls
of yourself, which is your own mother. She was born with you again and again, many times she was born with you. And she longs
that I give my child another birth once again, so that they may receive that great pleasure. It's like there's a machine in front of
me today. You know, it was first well prepared and then brought before me and then my voice is coming to you from it. But the
question is, we are not at ease/ Sahaja. It is very difficult for man to be at ease. It is not difficult for dogs, cats, trees at all. Just
think about this little thing, that the day you were born, you were born as a human being. Whether you were born in India, whether
you were born in England, whether you were born in America, whether you were in Japan, whether you were born in China. God
did not create all this England, America, nor China, nor Hindustan. But the moment you were born, you thought that you were an
Indian. The second thing came to his mind that there are parents for you. The third thought started that you have your relations.
This village is yours. This city of Bombay belongs to us. Then it began that this is our name. That's our job. This is our position.
All these are Miss Identifications of Life. All is false. We consider all falsehoods to be our own. We hue & cry for it, we fight the
world. They cause havoc. But whatever is false is false, it will remain false and it is false. The truth is the same, that you are
human. And only from a human being can you become a superhuman being. You can be Super Man. In which you will reach the

stage from where you will see what this game is going on. This God's own power will flow from within you because you will know
what its power is. What are it’s deeds? How does that work? I can't teach you anything about it. There cannot be any mantras
and so on. This thing cannot happen by any means. Big pundits come to me. Seeing their scholarship I think that I am a great
fool. But I ask them, 'Have you found that bliss, that supreme happiness that you are talking about?' It's not our cup of tea. You
have to do this for it, you have to do that for it. We have to be purified. What are you are purifying about? We are mothers. We are
pure first. Nobody can accept this. Scholars have no mothers. Nothing there. They are the biggest. They become so educated
that they don't even have a mother. Such an educated person is of no use to Sahaja Yoga. A kind of bizarre ego comes to mind.
I'm not saying that man doesn't have ego. There is ego and there is super-ego too. There is ego and there is also super ego. I'm
going to talk to you about that tomorrow. But the perturbations that come before us, the perplexities of it, bind us in such a way
that men are not prepared to leave it. For example, I went to America. Now let's look at the scholars' talk. You'd be surprised that
learned people talk like that! they said to me, 'Mother, you should charge some money for what you are doing. Some fees should
be imposed. They came so-and-so, they charge $275 and you're giving it for free. It doesn't cost people anything. It belongs to
the one who sent them with sticks. I said, "What a fool. How does he talk? I said, 'Brother, whatever price you want to put for my
love, put.” Now that you have bent down to pay the price of your mother's love. What can be called this great stupidity, that they
even think of God, a spectacle of money.
Man has become so egoistic with money that he thinks that he can even encash God. The same thing has happened in our
temples, mosques and churches. Wherever you go, this is a state of religion. What knowledge is in it? You tell me what wisdom
is there? You say in temples that brother may take my 101 rupees offering and give me liberation. Now you are buying permits
with money! "I am a very charitable man, Mother. I gave so much money to that temple. And it turned out that the priests who
were there, I saw, were great demons. In Mathura where Krishna settled. He performed all their lilas. You will be surprised that
when I went to Mathura, I was stunned to see that the priests there are ....... (vague) I cannot say that of others. All are the same
followers who were the followers of Kansa and were demons. And today they are robbing everyone. No religious man can rob
money. He is not used to living on other's money. His built is not such that no one can buy him. None can be the buyer. One who
is buying him, is that religious! Man's intellect is so stupid that it wants to look for religion. What an uncomfortable thing. It's an
impossible issue. You talk about impossibility, it is difficult to say. Absolutely difficult. What an uneasy fantasy that you are
buying God by paying money. But today, ever since I was born, I see that only that business has been run in the name of religion.
Some make money by giving speeches, some earn money by doing something. They're buying all motors. Buying a house. They
are buying residences. Buying motors with the money of the devotees of God. And what about you guys too? You people believe
this, that is why you have made these people so big. This is also a big fault of yours. You give too much recognition to these
people. Because you also have one of your egos in it, that let's buy God for two rupees. They also know your weaknesses very
well. Money cannot buy God. It's a very embarrassing thing. You can't buy something that is alive. Talking about buying love is a
great insult to love and a great sin. And these people should also be given to understand that a person who talks about religion
without taking it and sits as a guru commits a great sin. And a great punishment for him from God, awaits. You will make money
here. You will earn money here. But in the kingdom of God, such a man will not be forgiven. This must be understood. Such sort
of thing must not be thought or attempted. This is not a socio-economic activity. Everyone has made a business of it. You
cannot make religion a business. I am telling you now, but if you see a temple as you go, you will be offering rupees two before
you go. This is the embarrassment of man. This does not mean that God is not present in the temples, but they are sitting there
and suffering, "O Rama! That's why I've been made to sit here and a demon sitting in front of me is snatching the money from all.
He is snatching my devotees. "She is crying, this mother, at home. Where did you show Kalki? Set it right.” Embarrassing, the
whole thing became uncomfortable. Another way is that you are getting yourself purified. At first, there would be purification, but
by giving money, many people would purify themselves. But not this with money, Get yourself mentally purified. Who is going to
do is what’s wrong. What is going to do is what’s wrong. Now what are you getting done from him? Just as you have decided
that you have to purify, you take it that you cannot be purified. Because the reason for which purification takes place, what
carries it, what cleans it, you do not have that water. You don't have the vibrations with which you are purifying. I am not against
purification at all.
But I am against stupidity, that if you move your hands like this, purification will not happen. You need that water with which you
can purify yourself. For that, at least these vibrations should come inside you, otherwise you cannot purify yourself. That soap
should come to you with which you can purify yourself. There is no airborne purification, there is a lot of ego in that. Someone

might think I have a very pure mind. Self-realization should come first for purification. Just like it is in dogma. I'm not against
dogma. I never will be. But it should be understood that when we are calling someone, there should be at least some connection
in it. Otherwise, whom are we calling? We are damaging our own phone. In matters concerning God, we think that whatever we
say is right and whatever we do is right. The difficult sentiment of a person is to imagine about God and keep their imagination.
This is the foolishness of that person. Because He is as He is. You have to see Him, know Him, then think about Him. You have
only thought from your mind that God is like this. This is God. I didn't think about winning the lottery, God showed great grace
upon me.
Oh, whether they have any business or not, that God is sitting there to give you a lottery ticket. God is as He is. He will give you
what you deserve. He won't give it just because you ask for it. Tomorrow, if a child comes to me and says, "Mother, give me
poison." Will I give them poison? If they ask, "Mother, somehow bring me something that would just entertain me for a while and
later make my head explode."Will I give such a thing to them? We give our children only what is real, what is absolute. Giving
them what parents don't give is a mistake. They are not parents, they are wrong parents. Whatever you ask from the Supreme,
ask only the Supreme. There's none else to ask from. He has everything. What kind of illusion and deceit is this, asking for it from
them? You are running after what pursuit.
This has only developed fear, worries, and troubles within you. By which your head is filled with all tensions and you are troubled.
Is this also something to ask for? If you go to a King, ask for kingship. Are you going to a beggar? But humans are uneasy. They
are uneasy. Those who give them such things by performing miracles, (it's very unclear) to them.
I ask you to look towards those countries that have achieved everything in materialism. In countries where everything has been
acquired, where servants ride in cars, you need to go inside these countries to see.
Is that country happy? Why are there so many suicides there? Why have all the children left their homes? Why are the people
fleeing their homes? What is happening? We should think. Are we also going in that direction? Are we also going to burn
ourselves in the same fire? Are we also going to fall into that pit? Are we, the residents of this Yoga Land also going from the
same path?
Even in that situation, when our children will run around as hippies and smoke marijuana, then we will wake up, and then we will
understand that we need to shorten the path. That's wrong. Happiness, peace, and joy are within us. I don't give you any
command for this tomorrow. No one teaches you for this. No one can give you rules for this. No one can teach it to you.
Just as a seed sprouts from itself, similarly the seed of yourself, residing within you, sprouts by itself. I just pour a little water of
love into it. And when your seed awakens, you too can pour the water of love into others. When one lamp is lit, it will light another
lamp. Life's layers unfold naturally.
Artificiality cannot create a life, cannot create a life. But when you understand this thing with intelligence, and comprehend it,
only then does this thing manifest within, only then does the truth become visible from afar. Truth does not take on a single form
with us. It is not identified. We know the truth well, we see it in books, we read it. But truth is not identified with us. Truth stays
distant from us. We perceive truth. Its sighting remains occasional. And it feels like someone is deceiving. It's not
understandable. Let's agree that this is the truth. But we cannot become identical with the truth. There's no fusion with it. Only
through understanding can someone bind with it. What is the reason? I'll tell you tomorrow. What's the reason? I'll tell you
tomorrow. But today, please let me tell you what its context is? This thing happens naturally, it doesn't happen by doing
something. It happens from within oneself. And it's going to happen. A new dimension is about to unfold. And because it's going
to happen in your consciousness, there's no need to tell anyone about it. Please don't consider me like Guru etc. as you consider
others. I am a mother. A mother washes her child's feet. She bathes them. She loves them. A guru only gives. She doesn't desire
anything. She doesn't ask for anything. She only loves. Whether you beat her, scold her, put her in difficult situations, she still
remains in love. Even if she scolds you, she does it so out of love. Everything is happening in love. Then what can you do? You
just perform actions, perform actions from within. Whatever peaceful form it may be, I won't need to say anything. I won't need to
do anything. Naturally, like the rays of the sun spreading across the world, by spreading its net, it gives you life. Similarly, this

love also spreads, enters into you, and acts within. There's no need to do anything. This is simplicity and this is liberation. Seeing
you people in such numbers brings great joy. Despite so many troubles in this country, people still seek peace, search for
happiness, and want to achieve everything. They don't go to the wrong places. This is a big thing, this is accumulated from past
lives, which has brought you here today. For this, let me tell you a small story. Once Nala had caught hold of Kali. You know Nala,
the king Nala. There's no need to explain so much in India. Everyone knows. Kali was caught, and Nala said to Kali, "Come, I will
twist your neck in such a way that you will never be alive again. You have deceived me greatly." Kali thought now there is no
escape. So he said, "Alright brother, you can kill me. No problem. But listen to my glory. Listen to the glory of Kali Yuga. Then you
won't kill me." "What is this glory? Alright, tell me." This glory is that in Kali Yuga, even in these mountains, in these caves,
wandering sages and saints are lost, wandering while thinking, 'Help, help.'
It is in the Kaliyug that they will come to the household as an ordinary person, become a saint and they are going to transcend. In
this era where the outcry will be completely done. Lawlessness will flourish completely. Then righteousness will arise in the
hearts of these people and destroy all iniquity. This is the praise of the iron age. And finish me off if you want. But the ..... of all
this. And that's what is evident. The time has come that work is going to be done in this Kaliyug itself. Cancer-like disease.
I can still say with confidence today what I have said before. Except with natural cooperation, nothing can be fixed. Most
physical ailments can be healed through these vibrations. But one should not be interested in diseases. Doctors should be
prepared first. Let the doctors be prepared first. Let a thousand such doctors be prepared. There is plenty of time. You don't need
to pass a medical degree for that. Because here you have to work like this, work like this. Vibrations have come, just rotate your
hands and the work is done. When the signs come, all of nature will flow out from within you. You will be amazed, someone can
do your work effortlessly. Very effortlessly, you will be amazed at yourself. Many people say, 'Mother, we are great sinners. How
can it be possible for us?' I said, don't say such things in front of me.
If a child were to go to his mother and say, 'Mother, I am very sinful,' would the mother be very happy? Don't do such things in
front of me. What sin of yours is there that I cannot bear? What dirty thing of yours is there that I cannot endure? What accident
is there that cannot be handled in my case? Everything can be managed. A mother's power is immense. Don't provoke her! There
is hatred inside someone. Because when you start running, when your path begins, then you have to work hard. Many people
become successful without hard work, like some who have come here, from America, they have worked hard. Sahaja yoga
achieved it in one go. But some people waver. Especially children. Children are naturally straightforward. When they set out to
achieve something, they hardly ever face problems. Many get stuck in it. But many people are such that they cross over, then
they hold on, then they cross over again. They hold on, then they cross over again. Just now I met a Nagpanthi Baba. He touched
your feet. He began saying, 'Mother, I have just grasped the Agnya Chakra and the Vishuddhi Chakra.' He said, 'I have awakened
the Kundalini with great effort. I have worked hard.' A saint even told me, he told everyone, 'After twenty-one thousand penances,
I felt vibrations. Mother gave you all with great love. I don't know what good deeds you did in your past life! I just cut wood for so
many years. I lived in the jungles. I never met anyone in the world. Many get stuck in it. But many people are such that they cross
over, then they hold on, then they cross over again. They hold on, then they cross over again. Just now I met a Nagpanthi Baba.
He touched your feet. He began saying, 'Mother, I have just grasped the Agnya Chakra and the Vishuddhi Chakra.' He said, 'I have
awakened the Kundalini with great effort. I have worked hard.' A saint even told me, he told everyone, 'After twenty-one thousand
penances, I felt vibrations. Mother gave you all with great love. I don't know what good deeds you did in your past life! I just cut
wood for so many years. I lived in the jungles. I never met anyone in the world.
Then after working hard for twenty-one thousand years, after many lifetimes, my vibrations broke. And you all got it for free. And
today Mother washes your hands and feet.' Who said to go somewhere? Stay here. Get married. Having children is fine. Some
mothers feel good when their children become renunciants. What's the need to beg your life from your mother? Stay calm, stay
relaxed, eat, drink, enjoy. Now, when it comes to enjoyment, another business starts. I don't understand. If I say, 'Enjoy yourself,'
then people head to the bars. It's amazing that those who refused alcohol, their disciples become confirmed alcoholics. The
opposite of what was said is happening. I was in Tehran recently. There, I said, Mohammad Sahab had said not to drink alcohol.
So, Omar Khayyam wrote poetry about alcohol there. His, Omar Khayyam’s cassets made. At first, they wanted to beat him. He
built temples of alcohol. On your land, a personality like Mohammad Sahab has emerged. Use your intelligence, understand

something. Hindus were told one thing, that there is the same divinity within everyone, you are repeatedly reborn. You can be a
Mahar or a Brahmin at times. You can also be a Muslim at times. They became so rigid. When I went to Pune. There, a
gentleman started saying, you are not a Brahmin. How can you speak on religion? I said, I am a Brahmin, come forward. When
they came forward, things went like this. I said, 'What is this? Hold on to your Brahminhood. What's happening? Why are you
trembling?' They said, 'You are trembling because you are powerful. I said, 'This madman is trembling, and you are trembling too.
Both are the same.' Why aren't the rest trembling? Brahminhood exists when you are awake, Muslimhood exists when it wakes
up, Christianity exists when it awakens. Before that, who is imposing all this brand? Who gave the authority? Who told? Its brand
is being rotated everywhere, we are here, we are there. All this doesn't work in front of God's notes. You can move them here and
there. Only the real notes will work with God. The fake ones don't work there. Any kind of manipulation you do. So, whatever
notes you place, we are here, we are there, we are in control, they won't work there. And those who believe in such nonsense and
hold on to rigid beliefs are not eligible for Sahaj Yoga.
You are disrespecting your own religion. Muslims disrespect their religion... (unclear) Jesus had told Christians one thing, that do
not believe in ghosts. Ghosts are bad. Do not touch spirits at all, openly, against God, no one else has ever said. Even Guru Nanak
said that. But I cannot describe the remaining ghosts there to you. They play their tricks, they manipulate, apart from that,
whatever was lacking, many have gone from here. They are all wrapping them up, gathering them. Some have even bought
thirty-thirty Rolls Royces. They have made a business out of it. There are things like this. Whatever was said, the opposite of that
thing, whatever was said with religion, is not religion. Religion has to be completely explained. Especially high religions like
Hinduism. Those which have been investigated by sages and monks so much. How many things have been discovered. It is
surprising how much knowledge this human has! How was this information obtained?
When I read the greatness of the goddess, I think, was Markandeya Swami sitting with a microscope? How did he know so
precisely? When I read Adi Shankaracharya, I am amazed. How did he understand each and every small thing, what does 'hu'
mean? What does 'haan' mean? What does 'him' mean? He figured it out. Completely surrendered. It's very difficult work. It's very
difficult work. I don't know how they figured it out. If the establishment of such great religions has happened, it wasn't done by
one person. There shouldn't even be a question of fundamentalism. It shouldn't happen. And whatever these people have figured
out, it's all true. But by rote learning or by their saying, you cannot have a vision of that truth. Until you directly experience the
truth within, you yourself are not the embodiment of truth. Many people wander in search of truth. But they end up falling into
falsehood. This is because it's unnatural. Naturalness happens when truth is found in the world.
Without truth, we will not accept anything else. Even I don't need to believe. You shouldn't even deny me. But I don't need to
believe blindly, saying, "Yes, Mother, alright, alright." No. When you have the experience within you, you will yourself know that I
did not tell you anything vague. I don't want to deceive you. I don't want anything from you. Except that you attain this welfare.
Attain that ultimate state. There will be many blessings about that. You have an account in the bank, I want to cash it. I am just a
cashier. But what about someone who doesn't have any account? Something should be there for them too. Overdraft is not
possible. But there should be a little in the account of the Divine too. Just as many people come to me, Mother, they are fine now.
We are not fine. It's worth thinking about. If a mother's love is right for everyone, then it should be fair. All the children of a
mother are not the same. Or if God is a male, if He is a father, if He is your protector, then what should be done? He also knows
that if you are evil, tomorrow if Hitler says, "Sir, please give me the kingdom." then who will give him the kingdom? He hasn't
faced any punishment. He should face severe punishment. A man should also understand that if we are in simplicity, if we are at
the feet of God, then God is very pleased with us. And in this matter, you cannot pretend. He knows everything about you. He
hears your voice, he knows everything. He knows every little thing. He is the same, this small dormant Kundalini that resides
within you, the power that resides within you, is like a tape recorder where all things are stored within Him. And that same tape
recorder, the tape it has, knows when you can cross the threshold. It will only rise, it will only operate when you come into
contact with a person who has the authority of religion. The rest play with the Kundalini, it's a big spectacle. They do not awaken
the Kundalini, they insult Ganesha greatly. He used to guard it, he knew all those donkeys, if you were there, and if your Kundalini
were awakened, it would turn into a spectacle. They write such books that your hands burn while reading them. It happens. Who
told you to touch the Kundalini? Who are you? Your mother is sitting inside, her gatekeeper Shri Ganesha is seated. He is the
eternal child. They know that their mother is covered in shame. It is their duty to uphold her dignity, her honour. When you try to
assert your authority over them in the wrong way, they don't do anything. But that boy of theirs, he's very naughty. He doesn't

listen. No matter how much you explain to him, he won't listen. Things get so messed up that you feel helpless. A gentleman
came to me in Delhi recently. He started saying, "Kundalini has awakened, feeling unwell due to the heat." I said, "Kundalini is so
cool that its temperature is minus 2 degrees. It's as if it's sulking. It's absolutely cold. Cold vibrations come from it. That heat you
felt was a figment of your imagination. When Kundalini rises, how does it rise? What is Kundalini? There's nothing to be afraid of.
It's your mother. Where is she seated within you? What do they call it medically? What do they say scientifically? What does
psychology say about it? All of these will be explained to you, and I will also explain what happens during its awakening. What
changes occur within you? What state of mind do you enter? I will delve into this. Come tomorrow and the day after as well.
Make sure to come for three days. People nowadays think, "Let's have some water and then go listen to the mother's speech."
Find some time. Nowadays, we use wrist watch to set alarms to save time. We're saving time for just one thing. If you think
about it, we're not saving time for our progress, for our ascent, for our struggle, or for anything else. No, we're not saving time to
go to the cinema.
I am not against cinema. But if time is being saved anywhere, it must be devoted to your progress. You must spare three days.
And a large number of you should come tomorrow and attain this. Getting it is the thing. It can happen very easily. After this, we
will try to show you a little practical demonstration of it. What you will experience within you. Many have already experienced it. It
happens in a moment. In a moment, a person transcends. If the preparation is there, understand, if you have any physical
element, if you have any physical pain, Kundalini stops. "Fix this, then I will rise." So I fix it. And in this process, you also get fixed.
But it's not my duty to fix. Kundalini does it. She does it. But the man who never even thinks about spirituality, who has no
interest in the Divine, he comes to me, Mother, I have come to you, as they say in Marathi, 'Muddamahuna aalo,' I have come
knowingly. I asked, 'Why have you come?' I thought maybe my son was running towards me? They said, 'My uncle, my
grandfather, someone from here, someone from there, has cancer. Mother, please cure him.' I said, brother, I don't understand
this. This is going beyond the limits of charity. Those who are cooperative, who have transcended, they are blessed. They are
blessed with physical, mental, and intellectual blessings. Not only that, it's a worldly blessing as well. As many people transcend,
as many people attain. Many people have transcended effortlessly in the past. You are sitting here. They never come in a
collective manner. That's why you should understand that this progress is collective. This is the complete thing. If one individual
does it alone, it will have to be done on the Himalayas. But in the Kali Yuga, the entire cosmic body has to awaken. It's not just an
individual matter. When you meditate, you will understand why Mother is saying the cosmic being is involved. The entire society
has to be involved. The entire society. Because when one person's cycle increases more, another's decreases, and someone else
gets something. You'll have to cross-check among yourselves. You'll have to exchange with each other. You'll have to share your
powers. Only then will it work. Without that, this thing won't be ready. I have given it to many. I have given it to many ministers, to
many high-ranking officials. To kings - emperors, and I don't know who else, scholars, wrestlers, and so on. I have given it to
many. But sitting at home, Mother has given us great joy. Then whenever we meet, "Mother, my vibrations have disappeared!
What happened?" "Oh brother, you've caught onto three chakras. The vibrations will go away. You should come into meditation."
"Mother, I don't have time! I am a very important person." You have become so important that you don't have time, then your
existence is worthless. Such people, who become like chimpanzees and the like, will become like them. Those who consider
themselves extremely important. Greed for money. Greed for power. Greed for position, prestige. Those who are wasting their
time, nothing good will come of them. Especially in Sahaja yoga. In Sahajayoga, only those will benefit who can spare a little time
for themselves. It will be good for those who can also take time for themselves, it will be good for them. It's a matter of your own
choice. It's a matter of your freedom. It's a matter of your own thinking. No one can force you. If you don't have the desire, if your
heart is not in it, if you haven't accepted it in your freedom, then how can you be made a king? It will be forced upon you a little
bit. You should have your own preparation, your own desire, and it should be with complete freedom. Not because I'm saying so.
Not at all. Because you are feeling it internally. That's why it will happen. Who am I to say this to you today? Nothing yet. When
you become ready, then it's another matter. When you are fully committed, when we have a relationship, but not now. Until then,
you are completely free in yourself. You choose. Think and achieve it.

1975-0219, Two minds, lying vertically parallel on both the sides of the Sushumna
View online.
19 February 1975
Two Minds, Lying Vertically Parallel On Both The Sides Of The Sushumna
Public Program
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai (India)
Talk Language: English | Transcript (English) – VERIFIED
Public program day 3, Mumbai, India, 19-02-1975
Yesterday I explained to you the position of the kundalini in our spinal cord and why it exists there, and what are its functions.
God has created human beings in his own image and all these things that I have told you yesterday are first built up in the body
of the Virata that is the aspect of God in which all that is created exists.
But let us see in the human being in what way this kundalini came. As I have told you yesterday that there are three powers that
exist in the body and the most important one is the central one which is incarnated as Mahalakshmi which helped us to evolve
into a superhuman being. That channel is known as Sushumna which I have shown you in the centre. And there is a gap between
the navel point and the abode of the kundalini. This portion of that channel or you can say of that energy is settled down here and
kundalini, which is not used till you get the chance of meeting somebody who can give you self-realization and that is the only
time the kundalini rises.
These two exist within us psychological. One has the constructive power by which we think, or we can say the preconscious
mind , the Mana the postman which is every moment receiving something from the conscious mind and putting it into the
subconscious mind.
For example, you are listening to me, you are paying attention to me. I am talking something, you are receiving it from me and it
is going into your past. Again you are receiving from me and it is going into the past. So this represents the preconscious mind
while the other is the storing of all your experiences is the subconscious mind.
We have two minds, lying vertically parallel on both the sides of the Sushumna. This is one of the greatest facts most of the
people who have been searching God have not understood. That to go to your Sushumna Nadi or to go to your present moment.
And this moment when you are listening to me moment to moment you are living, this conscious mind, to approach that
conscious mind and stay there at that point one need not go to the subconscious or to the preconscious.
One need not to control the preconscious mind. That is the Mana, neither it is necessary for you to go to the subconscious mind
as have these siddhis and things like that and go to the bhootvidya and pretavidya. Both things are not at all necessary, on the
contrary, those who go on these lines might be able to see the kundalini, they might be able to see all the chakras from the
backdoor, while in the centre when you rise in the Sushumna Nadi then you do not see anything whatsoever but you just jump
out. Later on you can come down and see all this.
For example, I live in London. In my house, is about ten miles drive from the station. Some people, visitors are coming to see me,
so I have to receive them at the station. I go there, receive them and they come to my house, direct. You know about London that
nobody is seen on the streets. It’s a very small village so there is nobody on the streets. You can’t meet anybody.
You just come straight to your own house, and then you enter inside the house. You stay there, then you know your neighbours
gradually. But supposing somebody arrives without telling me, and he has to find out my house. So he goes from places to
places to the backdoors, because front door nobody is willing to open in England, especially in London, people are afraid. So he
goes from the backdoor. Goes from one house to another house inquiring as to where is this house, where I have to go? And the
